1. Kashmir Issue (Speech at the Prayer Meeting on 4th January 1948) Today there is talk of war everywhere

2. Everyone fears a war breaking out between the two countries

3. If that happens it will be a calamity both for India and for Pakistan

4. because whenever there is a fear of conflict anywhere the U.N

5. is asked to promote a settlement and to stop fighting from breaking out

6. however trivial the issue may appear to be, it could lead to a war between the two countries

7. It is a long memorandum and it has been cabled

8. Pakistan's leaders Zafrullah Khan and Liaquat Ali Khan have since issued long statements

9. I would take leave to say that their argument does not appeal to me

10. You may ask if I approve of the Union Government approaching the UNO I may say that I both approve and do not approve of what they did

11. I approve of it, because after all what else are they to do

12. They are convinced that what they are doing is right

13. If there are raids from outside the frontier of Kashmir, the obvious conclusion is that it must be with the connivance of Pakistan

14. But the denial does not settle the matter

15. Kashmir has acceded the accession upon certain conditions

16. If Pakistan harasses Kashmir and if Sheikh Abdullah who is the leader of Kashmir asks the Indian Union for help, the latter is bound to send help

17. Such help therefore was sent to Kashmir

18. At the same time Pakistan is being requested to get out of Kashmir and to arrive at a settlement with India over the question through bilateral negotiations

19. If no settlement can be reached in this way then a war is inevitable

20. It is to avoid the possibility of war that the Union Government has taken the step it did

21. Whether they are right in doing so or not God alone knows

22. Whatever might have been the attitude of Pakistan, if I had my way I would have invited Pakistan's representatives to India and we could have met, discussed the matter and worked out some settlement

23. They keep saying that they want an amicable settlement but they do nothing to create the conditions for such a settlement

24. I shall therefore humbly say to the responsible leaders of Pakistan that though we are now two countries  -  which is a thing I never wanted  -  we should at least try to arrive at an agreement so that we could live as peaceful neighbors

25. Let us grant for the sake of argument that all Indians are bad, but Pakistan at least is a new-born nation which has more ever come into being in the name of religion and it should at least keep itself clean

26. But they themselves make no such claim

27. It is not their argument that Muslims have committed no atrocities in Pakistan

28. I shall therefore suggest that it is now their duty, as far as possible, to arrive at an amicable understanding with India and live in harmony with her

29. Mistakes were made on both sides

30. But this does not mean that we should persist in those mistakes, for then in the end we shall only destroy ourselves in a war and the whole of the sub-continent will pass into the hands of some third power

31. That will be the worst imaginable fate for us

32. Therefore the two Dominions should come together with God as witness and find a settlement

33. The matter is now before the UNO

34. It cannot be withdrawn from there

35. But if India and Pakistan come to a settlement the big powers in the UNO will have to endorse that settlement

36. They will not object to the settlement

37. They themselves can only say that they will do their best to see that the two countries arrive at an understanding through mutual discussions

38. Let us pray to God is to grant that we may either learn to live in amity with each other or if we must light to let us fight to the very end

39. That may be folly but sooner or later it will purify us

40. I came to know of the incidents which took place last evening through Brijkishan

41. I had gone to the Camp for the evening prayer

42. I came away after the prayer but he had stayed over to talk to the people in the Camp

43. There are some Muslim houses at as little distance from the Camp

44. About four or five hundred inmates of the Camp mostly women and children but also some men  -  issued out of the Camp to take possession of the houses

45. I am told they did not indulge in any kind of violence

46. Some were occupied by the owners

47. They tried to take possession even of the latter

48. They immediately went to the spot and brought the situation under control at about 9 O' clock according to the information I have

49. The police have stayed on there

50. I understand they had to use tear gas

51. Tear gas does not kill but it can be pretty painful

52. I am told that something has happened today again

53. All I can say is that is a matter of great shame for us

54. Have not the refugees learnt even from their immense suffering that they have to exercise some restraint

55. It is highly improper to go and occupy other people's houses

56. It is for the Government to find them shelter or whatever else their need

57. Today the Government is our own

58. But if we defy our own Government and defy the police and forcibly occupy houses the Government is not likely to continue for long

59. It is still worse that such things should happen in the capital city of India where there are so many ambassadors from all over the world

60. Do we want to show them the spectacle of people occupying what-ever they can

61. It is all the more regrettable that women and children were used as a shield

62. It is like Muslim rulers keeping a herd of cows in the anguard of their armies to make sure that the Hindus would not fight

63. It is uncivilized, barbaric behavior

64. It is still more barbaric to put women and children in front to provide against the police making a lathi charge

65. I must humbly ask all the refugees - women and children  -  not to behave in this way

66. If they don't, then apart from a war between Indian and Pakistan, we may kill ourselves in mutual strife

67. We may lose Delhi and make ourselves the laughing-stock of the world

68. If we want to keep India a free country, we must stop the things that are at present going on

69. Reception in Madras (21.4.1915) In reply to the Welcome address read by Mr

70. Natesan on behalf of the Indian South African League, at a meeting at the Victoria Public Hall, Madras, on the 21st April 1915, with Dr

71. Sir Subramania Iyer in the Chair, Mr

72. If there is anything that we have deserved, as has been stated in this beautiful address, I can only say I lay it at the feet of my Master under whose inspiration I have been working all this time under exile in South Africa

73. In so far as the sentiments expressed in this address are merely prophetic

74. Sir, I accept them as a blessing and as a prayer from you and from this great meeting that both my wife and I myself may possess the power, the inclination, and the life to dedicate whatever we may develop in this sacred land of ours to the service of the Motherland

75. It is no wonder that we have come to Madras

76. Natesan, will perhaps tell you, we have been overdue and we have neglected Madras

77. But we have done nothing of the kind

78. We know that we had a corner in your hearts and we knew that you will not misjudge us if we did not hasten to Madras before going to the other presidencies and to other towns

79. What language do you propose to use for Magappan and Narayansawmy, lads of seventeen or eighteen years, who braved in simple faith all the trials, all the sufferings, and all the indignities for the sake of the honour of the Motherland (Cheers)

80. What language do you propose to use with reference to Valliamma, that sweet girl of seventeen years who was discharged from Maritzburg prison, skin and bone suffering from fever to which she succumbed after about a month's time (Cries of shame)

81. It was the Madrasis who of all the Indians were singled out by the great Divinity that rules over us for this great work

82. You have said that I inspired these great men and women, but I cannot accept that proposition

83. It was they, the simple-minded folk, who worked away in faith, never expecting the slightest reward, who inspired me, who kept me to the proper level , and who inspired me by their great sacrifice, by their great faith, by their great trust in the great God, to do the work that I was able to do

84. It is my misfortune that my wife and I have been obliged to work in the lime-light, and you have magnified out of all proportion (cries of 'No

85. No?') this little work we have been able to do

86. The inspiration was given by them to us, and we were able to be interpreters between the powers who called themselves the Governors and those men for whom redress was so necessary

87. We were simply links between those two parties and nothing more

88. It was my duty, having received the education that was given to me by my parents to interpret what was going on in our midst to those simple folk, and they rose to the occasion

89. They realised the might of religious force, and it was they who inspired us, and let them who have finished their work, and who have died for you and me, let them inspire you and us

90. We are still living and who knows whether the devil will not possess us tomorrow and we shall not forsake the post of duty before any new danger that may face us, But these three have gone for ever

91. An old man of 75 from the United Provinces, Harbart Singh, has also joined the majority and died in jail in South Africa; and he deserved the crown that you would seek to impose upon us

92. These young men deserve all the adjectives that you have so affectionately, but blindly lavished upon us

93. It was not only the Hindus who struggled, but there were Mohamedans, Parsis and Christians, and almost every part of India was represented in the struggled

94. They realised the common danger, and they realised also what their destiny was an Indians, and it was they, and they alone, who matched the soul-forces against the physical forces

95. (Loud applause.) Source : Speeches and Writings of Gandhi

96. Shankarlal Ghelabhai Banker, editor, and printer and publisher respectively of Young India, on charges under Section 124 A of the Indian Penal Code, was held on Saturday, 18th March 1922, before Mr

97. S., District and Sessions Judge, Ahmedabad.] Sir J

98. Strangman, Advocate-General, with Rao Bahadur Girdharlal Uttamram, Public Prosecutor of Ahmedabad, appeared for the Crown

99. Wild, Remembrancer of Legal Affairs, was also present

100. Among the members of the public who were present on the occasion were : Kasturba Gandhi, Sarojini Naidu, Pandit M

101. The Judge, who took his seat at 12 noon, said that there was slight mistake in the charges were then read out by the Registrar

102. The offending articles were then read out : first of them was, "Tampering with Loyalty"; and second, "The Puzzle and its Solution", and the last was "Shaking the Manes"

103. The Judge said that the law required that the charges should not be read out but explained

104. In this case it would not be necessary for him to say much by way of explanation

105. The charge in each case was that of bringing or attempting to excite into hatred or contempt or exciting or attempting to excite disaffection towards His Majesty's Government, established by law in British India

106. The charges having been read out, the Judge called upon the accused to plead to the charges

107. He asked Gandhiji whether he pleaded guilty or claimed to be tried

108. Gandhiji said : "I plead guilty to all the charges

109. I observe that the King's name has been omitted from the charge, and it has been properly omitted." The Judge asked Shri banker the same question and he too readily pleaded guilty

110. The Judge wished to give his verdict immediately after Gandhiji had pleaded guilty, but Sir Strangman insisted that the procedure should be carried out in full

111. The Advocate-General requested the Judge to take into account "the occurrences in Bombay, Malabar and Chauri Chaura, leading to rioting and murder"

112. As regards Shri Banker, the second accused, the offence was lesser

113. He did the publication but did not write

114. Sir Strangman's instructions were that Shri Banker was a man of means and he requested the court to impose a substantial fine in addition to such term of imprisonment as might be inflicted upon

115. Gandhi, do you wish to make any statement on the question of sentence

116. Gandhiji : I would like to make a statement

117. Court : Could you give me in writing to put it on record

118. Gandhiji : I shall give it as soon as I finish it

119. [Gandhiji then made the following oral statement followed by a written statement that he read.] Before I read this statement I would like to state that I entirely endorse the learned Advocate-General's remarks in connection with my humble self

120. Thinking over these things deeply and sleeping over them night after night, it is impossible for me to dissociate myself from the diabolical crimes of Chauri Chaura or the mad outrages of Bombay

121. He is quite right when he says, that as a man of responsibility, a man having received a fair share of education, having had a fair share of experience of this world, I should have known the consequences of every one of my acts

122. I knew that I was playing with fire

123. I ran the risk and if I was set free I would still do the same

124. I have felt it this morning that I would have failed in my duty, if I did not say what I said here just now

125. Non-violence is the first article of my faith

126. It is also the last article of my creed

127. I had either to submit to a system which I considered had done an irreparable harm to my country, or incur the risk of the mad fury of my people bursting forth when they understood the truth from my lips

128. I know that my people have sometimes gone mad

129. I am deeply sorry for it and I am, therefore, here to submit not to a light penalty but to the highest penalty

130. I do not plead any extenating act

131. I am here, therefore, to invite and cheerfully submit to the highest penalty that can be inflicted upon me for what in law is a deliberate crime, and what appears to me to be the highest duty of a citizen

132. The only course open to you, the Judge, is, as I am going to say in my statement, either to resign your post, or inflict on me the severest penalty if you believe that the system and law you are assisting to administer are good for the people

133. I do not except that kind of conversion

134. But by the time I have finished with my statement you will have a glimpse of what is raging within my breast to run this maddest risk which a sane man can run

135. To the court too I should say why I plead guilty to the charge of promoting disaffection towards the Government established by law in India

136. My public life began in 1893 in South Africa in troubled weather

137. My first contact with British authority in that country was not of a happy character

138. I discovered that as a man and an Indian, I had no rights

139. More 
correctly I discovered that I had no rights as a man because I was an Indian

140. I thought that this treatment of Indians was an excrescence upon a system that was intrinsically and mainly good

141. I gave the Government my voluntary and hearty co-operation, criticizing it freely where I felt it was faulty but never wishing its destruction

142. Consequently when the existence of the Empire was threatened in 1899 by the Boer challenge, I offered my services to it, raised a volunteer ambulance corps and served at several actions that took place for the relief of Ladysmith

143. Similarly in 1906, at the time of the Zulu 'revolt', I raised a stretcher bearer party and served till the end of the 'rebellion'

144. On both the occasions I received medals and was even mentioned in dispatches

145. For my work in South Africa I was given by Lord Hardinge a Kaisar-i-Hind gold medal

146. When the war broke out in 1914 between England and Germany, I raised a volunteer ambulance cars in London, consisting of the then resident Indians in London, chiefly students

147. Its work was acknowledge by the authorities to be valuable

148. In all these efforts at service, I was actuated by the belief that it was possible by such services to gain a status of full equality in the Empire for my countrymen

149. The first shock came in the shape of the Rowlatt Act-a law designed to rob the people of all real freedom

150. I felt called upon to lead an intensive agitation against it

151. Then followed the Punjab horrors beginning with the massacre at Jallianwala Bagh and culminating in crawling orders, public flogging and other indescribable humiliations

152. I discovered too that the plighted word of the Prime Minister to the Mussalmans of India regarding the integrity of Turkey and the holy places of Islam was not likely to be fulfilled

153. But all that hope was shattered

154. The Khilafat promise was not to be redeemed

155. The Punjab crime was whitewashed and most culprits went not only unpunished but remained in service, and some continued to draw pensions from the Indian revenue and in some cases were even rewarded

156. I saw too that not only did the reforms not mark a change of heart, but they were only a method of further raining India of her wealth and of prolonging her servitude

157. I came reluctantly to the conclusion that the British connection had made India more helpless than she ever was before, politically and economically

158. A disarmed India has no power of resistance against any aggressor if she wanted to engage, in an armed conflict with him

159. So much is this the case that some of our best men consider that India must take generations, before she can achieve Dominion Status

160. She has become so poor that she has little power of resisting famines

161. Before the British advent India spun and wove in her millions of cottages, just the supplement she needed for adding to her meagre agricultural resources

162. This cottage industry, so vital for India's existence, has been ruined by incredibly heartless and inhuman processes as described by English witness

163. Little do town dwellers how the semi-starved masses of India are slowly sinking to lifelessness

164. Little do they know that their miserable comfort represents the brokerage they get for their work they do for the foreign exploiter, that the profits and the brokerage are sucked from the masses

165. Little do realize that the Government established by law in British India is carried on for this exploitation of the masses

166. No sophistry, no jugglery in figures, can explain away the evidence that the skeletons in many villages present to the naked eye

167. I have no doubt whatsoever that both England and the town dweller of India will have to answer, if there is a God above, for this crime against humanity, which is perhaps unequalled in history

168. The law itself in this country has been used to serve the foreign exploiter

169. My unbiased examination of the Punjab Marital Law cases has led me to believe that at least ninety-five per cent of convictions were wholly bad

170. My experience of political cases in India leads me to the conclusion, in nine out of every ten, the condemned men were totally innocent

171. Their crime consisted in the love of their country

172. In ninety-nine cases out of hundred, justice has been denied to Indians as against Europeans in the courts of India

173. This is not an exaggerated picture

174. It is the experience of almost every Indian who has had anything to do with such cases

175. In my opinion, the administration of the law is thus prostituted, consciously or unconsciously, for the benefit of the exploiter

176. The greater misfortune is that the Englishmen and their Indian associates in the administration of the country do not know that they are engaged in the crime I have attempted to describe

177. I am satisfied that many Englishmen and Indian officials honestly systems devised in the world, and that India is making steady, though, slow progress

178. This awful habit has added to the ignorance and the self-deception of the administrators

179. Section 124 A, under which I am happily charged, is perhaps the prince among the political sections of the Indian Penal Code designed to suppress the liberty of the citizen

180. Affection cannot be manufactured or regulated by law

181. If one has no affection for a person or system, one should be free to give the fullest expression to his disaffection, so long as he does not contemplate, promote, or incite to violence

182. But the section under which mere promotion of disaffection is a crime

183. I have studied some of the cases tried under it; I know that some of the most loved of India's patriots have been convicted under it

184. I consider it a privilege, therefore, to be charged under that section

185. I have endeavored to give in their briefest outline the reasons for my disaffection

186. I have no personal ill-will against any single administrator, much less can I have any disaffection towards the King's person

187. But I hold it to be a virtue to be disaffected towards a Government which in its totality has done more harm to India than any previous system

188. India is less manly under the British rule than she ever was before

189. Holding such a belief, I consider it to be a sin to have affection for the system

190. And it has been a precious privilege for me to be able to write what I have in the various articles tendered in evidence against me

191. In fact, I believe that I have rendered a service to India and England by showing in non-co-operation the way out of the unnatural state in which both are living

192. In my opinion, non-co-operation with evil is as much a duty as is co-operation with good

193. But in the past, non-co-operation has been deliberately expressed in violence to the evil-doer

194. I am endeavoring to show to my countrymen that violent non-co-operation only multiples evil, and that as evil can only be sustained by violence, withdrawal of support of evil requires complete abstention from violence

195. Non-violence implies voluntary submission to the penalty for non-co-operation with evil

196. I am here, therefore, to invite and submit cheerfully to the highest penalty that can be inflicted upon me for what in law is deliberate crime, and what appears to me to be the highest duty of a citizen

197. On the eve of Dandi March (11.3.1930) [On the 11th of March 1930,the crowd swelled to 10,000 at the evening prayer held on the Sabarmati sands at Ahmedabad

198. At the end, Gandhiji delivered a memorable speech on the eve of his historic march:] In all probability this will be my last speech to you

199. Even if the Government allow me to march tomorrow morning, this will be my last speech on the sacred banks of the Sabarmati

200. Possibly these may be the last words of my life here

201. I have already told you yesterday what I had to say

202. Today I shall confine myself to what you should do after my companions and I are arrested

203. The programme of the march to Jalalpur must be fulfilled as originally settled

204. The enlistment of the volunteers for this purpose should be confined to Gujarat only

205. From what I have been and heard during the last fortnight, I am inclined to believe that the stream of civil resisters will flow unbroken

206. But let there be not a semblance of breach of peace even after all of us have been arrested

207. We have resolved to utilize all our resources in the pursuit of an exclusively nonviolent struggle

208. Let no one commit a wrong in anger

209. I wish these words of mine reached every nook and corner of the land

210. My task shall be done if I perish and so do my comrades

211. It will then be for the Working Committee of the Congress to show you the way and it will be up to you to follow its lead

212. So long as I have reached Jalalpur, let nothing be done in contravention to the authority vested in me by the Congress

213. But once I am arrested, the whole responsibility shifts to the Congress

214. No one who believes in non-violence, as a creed, need, therefore, sit still

215. My compact with the Congress ends as soon as I am arrested

216. Wherever possible, civil disobedience of salt should be started

217. These laws can be violated in three ways

218. It is an offence to manufacture salt wherever there are facilities for doing so

219. The possession and sale of contraband salt, which includes natural salt or salt earth, is also an offence

220. The purchasers of such salt will be equally guilty

221. To carry away the natural salt deposits on the seashore is likewise violation of law

222. In short, you may choose any one or all of these devices to break the salt monopoly

223. We are, however, not to be content with this alone

224. There is no ban by the Congress and wherever the local workers have self-confidence other suitable measures may be adopted

225. I stress only one condition, namely, let our pledge of truth and nonviolence as the only means for the attainment of Swaraj be faithfully kept

226. For the rest, every one has a free hand

227. But, than does not give a license to all and sundry to carry on their own responsibility

228. Wherever there are local leaders, their orders should be obeyed by the people

229. Where there are no leaders and only a handful of men have faith in the programme, they may do what they can, if they have enough self-confidence

230. They have a right, nay it is their duty, to do so

231. The history of the is full of instances of men who rose to leadership, by sheer force of self-confidence, bravery and tenacity

232. We too, if we sincerely aspire to Swaraj and are impatient to attain it, should have similar self-confidence

233. Our ranks will swell and our hearts strengthen, as the number of our arrests by the Government increases

234. Much can be done in many other ways besides these

235. The Liquor and foreign cloth shops can be picketed

236. We can refuse to pay taxes if we have the requisite strength

237. The lawyers can give up practice

238. The public can boycott the law courts by refraining from litigation

239. Government servants can resign their posts

240. In the midst of the despair reigning all round people quake with fear of losing employment

241. The number of Government servants in the country does not exceed a few hundred thousands

242. Even free India will not be able to accommodate a greater number of public servants

243. A Collector then will not need the number of servants, he has got today

244. Our starving millions can by no means afford this enormous expenditure

245. If, therefore, we are sensible enough, let us bid good-bye to Government employment, no matter if it is the post of a judge or a peon

246. Let all who are co-operating with the Government in one way or another, be it by paying taxes, keeping titles, or sending children to official schools, etc

247. withdraw their co-operation in all or as many watts as possible

248. Then there are women who can stand shoulder to shoulder with men in this struggle

249. It was the message that I desired to impart to you before starting on the march or for the jail

250. I wish that there should be no suspension or abandonment of the war that commences tomorrow morning or earlier, if I am arrested before that time

251. I shall eagerly await the news that ten batches are ready as soon as my batch is arrested

252. I believe there are men in India to complete the work our begun by me

253. I have faith in the righteousness of our cause and the purity of our weapons

254. And where the means are clean, there God is undoubtedly present with His blessings

255. And where these three combine, there defeat is an impossibility

256. A Satyagrahi, whether free or incarcerated, is ever victorious

257. He is vanquished only, when he forsakes truth and nonviolence and turns a deaf ear to the inner voice

258. If, therefore, there is such a thing as defeat for even a Satyagrahi, he alone is the cause of it

259. God bless you all and keep off all obstacles from the path in the struggle that begins tomorrow

260. Speech at Round Table Conference (30.11.1931) It will be after all and at best a paper solution

261. But immediately you withdraw that wedge, the domestic ties, the domestic affection, the knowledge of common birth  -  do you suppose that all these will count for nothing

262. Were Hindus and Mussalmans and Sikhs always at war with one another when there was no British rule, when there was no English face seen there

263. We have chapter and verse given to us by Hindu historians and by Mussalman historians to say that we were living in comparative peace even then

264. And Hindus and Mussalmans in the villages are not even today quarrelling

265. In those days they were not known to quarrel at all

266. The late Maulana Muhammad Ali often used to tell me, and he was himself a bit of an historian

267. And so have Hindu historians written

268. This quarrel is not old; this quarrel is coeval with this acute shame

269. I do not intend to say much tonight about the Princes, but I should be wronging them and should be wronging the Congress if I did not register my claim, not with the Round Table Conference but with the Princes

270. It is open to the Princes to give their terms on which they will join the Federation

271. I have appealed to them to make the path easy for those who inhabit the other part of India, and therefore, I can only make these suggestions for their favourable consideration, for their earnest consideration

272. They would have gone a long way to show to the world and to show to the whole of India that they are also fired with a democratic spirit, that they do not want to remain undiluted autocrats, but that they want to become constitutional monarch even as King George of Great Britain is

273. An Autonomous Frontier Province : Let India get what she is entitled to and what she can really take, but whatever she gets, and whenever she gets it, let the Frontier Province get complete autonomy today

274. That Frontier will then be a standing demonstration to the whole of India, and therefore, the whole vote of the Congress will be given in favour of the Frontier Province getting provincial Autonomy tomorrow

275. Thanks: Last of all, my last is pleasant task for me

276. This is perhaps the last time that I shall be sitting with you at negotiations

277. I want to sit at the same table with you in your closets and to negotiate and to plead with you and to go down on bended knees before I take the final lead and final plunge

278. But whether I have the good fortune to continue to tender my co-operation or not does not depend upon me

279. It depends upon so many circumstances over which neither you nor we may have any control whatsoever

280. Then, let me perform this pleasant task of giving my thanks to all form Their Majesties down to the poorest men in the East End where I have taken up my habitation

281. In that settlement, which represent the poor people of the East End of London, I have become one of them

282. They have accepted me as a member, and as a favoured member of their family

283. It will be one of the richest treasures that I shall carry with me

284. Here, too, I have found nothing but courtesy and nothing but a genuine affection from all with whom I have come in touch

285. I have come in touch with so many Englishmen

286. It has been a priceless privilege to me, They have listened to what must have often appeared to them to be unpleasant, although it was true

287. Although I have often been obliged to say these things to them they have never shown the slightest impatience or irritation

288. It is impossible for me to forget these things

289. No matter what befalls me, no matter what the fortunes may be of this Round Table Conference, one thing I shall certainly carry with me, that is, that from high to low I have found nothing but the utmost courtesy and that utmost affection

290. I consider that it was well worth my paying this visit to England in order to find this human affection

291. The operatives, men and women, hugged me

292. They treated me as one of their own

293. I am carrying with me thousands upon thousands of English friendship

294. I do not know them but I read that affection in their eyes as early in the morning I walk through your streets

295. All this hospitality, all this kindness will never be effaced from my memory, no matter what befalls my unhappy land

296. I thank you for your forbearance

297. Benaras Hindu University Speech (4.2.1916) [Pandit Malaviya had invited Gandhiji to speak on the occasion of the opening of the Banaras Hindu University

298. Lord Hardinge, the Viceroy, had come specially to lay the foundation-stone of the University

299. To protect his life extra precautions were taken by the police

300. They were omnipresent and all houses along the route were guarded

301. Banaras was, so to say, in a state of siege]

302. Eminent persons from all over India had come

303. Many of them delivered addresses

304. On February 4, 1916 it was Gandhiji's turn to address the audience, mostly consisting of impressionable youths

305. A galaxy of princes, bedecked and bejeweled, had occupied the dias

306. The Maharaja of Darbhanga was in the chair

307. Gandhiji who was clad in a short, coarse dhoti, Kathiawadi cloak and turban rose to speak

308. The police precautions and the luxury around him hurt him deeply

309. Turning to the audience, Gandhiji said that he wanted to think audibly-speak without reserve: I wish to tender my humble apology for the long delay that took place before I was able to reach this place

310. And you will readily accept the apology when I tell you that I am not responsible for the delay nor is any human agency responsible for it

311. The fact is that I am like an animal on show, and my keepers in their over kindness always manage to neglect a necessary chapter in this life, and, that is, pure accident

312. In this case, they did not provide for the series of accidents that happened to us-to me, keepers, and my carriers

313. Friends, under the influence of the matchless eloquence of Mrs

314. Besant who has just sat down, pray, do not believe that our University has become a finished product, and that all the young men who are to come to the University, that has yet to rise and come into existence, have also come and returned from it finished citizens of a great empire

315. You will never be able merely through the lip, to give the message that India, I hope, will one day deliver to the world

316. I myself have been fed up with speeches and lectures

317. I except the lectures that have been delivered here during the last two days from this category, because they are necessary

318. But I do venture to suggest to you that we have now reached almost the end of our resources in speech-making; it is not enough that our ears are feasted, that our eyes are feasted, but it is necessary that our hearts have got to be touched and that out hands and feet have got to be moved

319. We have been told during the last two days how necessary it is, if we are to retain our hold upon the simplicity of Indian character, that our hands and feet should move in unison with our hearts

320. But this is only by way of preface

321. I wanted to say it is a matter of deep humiliation and shame for us that I am compelled this evening under the shadow of this great college, in this sacred city, to address my countrymen in a language that is foreign to me

322. I know that if I was appointed an examiner, to examine all those who have been attending during these two days this series of lectures, most of those who might be examined upon these lectures would fail

323. Because they have not been touched

324. I was present at the sessions of the great Congress in the month of December

325. There was a much vaster audience, and will you believe me when I tell you that the only speeches that touched the huge audience in Bombay were the speeches that were delivered in Hindustani

326. In Bombay, mind you, not in Benaras where everybody speaks Hindi

327. I am hoping that this University will see to it that the youths who come to it will receive their instruction through the medium of their vernaculars

328. Our languages the reflection of ourselves, and if you tell me that our languages are too poor to express the best thought, then say that the sooner we are wiped out of existence the better for us

329. Is there a man who dreams that English can ever become the national language of India

330. Why this handicap on the nation

331. Just consider for one moment what an equal race our lads have to run with every English lad

332. I had the privilege of a close conversation with some Poona professors

333. They assured me that every Indian youth, because he reached his knowledge through the English language, lost at least six precious years of life

334. Multiply that by the numbers of students turned out by our schools and colleges, and find out for yourselves how many thousand years have been lost to the nation

335. The charge against us is that we have no initiative

336. How can we have any, if we are to devote the precious years of our life to the mastery of a foreign tongue

337. Was it possible for any speaker yesterday and today to impress his audience as was possible for Mr

338. It was not the fault of the previous speakers that they could not engage the audience

339. They had more than substance enough for us in their addresses

340. But their addresses could not go home to us

341. I have heard it said that after all it is English educated India which is leading and which is leading and which is doing all the things for the nation

342. It would be monstrous if it were otherwise

343. The only education we receive is English education

344. Surely we must show something for it

345. But suppose that we had been receiving during the past fifty years education through our vernaculars, what should we have today

346. Today even our wives are not the sharers in our best thought

347. Look at Professor Bose and Professor Ray and their brilliant researches

348. Is it not a shame that their researches are not the common property of the masses

349. Let us now turn to another subject

350. The Congress has passed a resolution about self-government, and I have no doubt that the All-India Congress Committee and the Muslim League will do their duty and come forward with some tangible suggestions

351. But I, for one, must frankly confess that I am not so much interested in what they will be able to produce as I am interested in anything that the student world is going to produce or the masses are going to produce

352. No paper contribution will ever give us self-government

353. No amount of speeches will ever make us fit for self-government

354. It is only our conduct that will fit for us it

355. And how are we trying to govern ourselves

356. I want to think audibly this evening

357. I visited the Vishwanath temple last evening, and ad I was walking through those lanes, these were the thoughts that touched me

358. If a stranger dropped from above on to this great temple, and he had to consider what we as Hindus were, would he not be justified in condemning us

359. Is not this great temple a reflection of our own character

360. Is it right that the lanes of our sacred temple should be as dirty as they are

361. The houses round about are built anyhow

362. The lanes are tortuous and narrow

363. If even our temples are not models of roominess and cleanliness, what can our self-government be

364. Shall our temples be abodes of holiness, cleanliness and peace as soon as the English have retired from India, either of their own pleasure or by compulsion, bag and baggage

365. I entirely agree with the President of the Congress that before we think of self-government, we shall have to do the necessary plodding

366. In every city there are two divisions, the cantonment and the city proper

367. The city mostly is a stinking den

368. But we are a people unused to city life

369. But if we want city life, we cannot reproduce the easy-going hamlet life

370. It is not comforting to think that people walk about the streets of Indian Bombay under the perpetual fear of dwellers in the storeyed building spitting upon them

371. I do a great deal of railway traveling

372. I observe the difficulty of third-class passengers

373. But the railway administration is by no means to blame for all their hard lot

374. We do not know the elementary laws of cleanliness

375. We spit anywhere on the carriage floor, irrespective of the thoughts that it is often used as sleeping space

376. We do not trouble ourselves as to how we use it; the result is indescribable filth in the compartment

377. The so-called better class passengers overawe their less fortunate brethren

378. Among them I have seen the student world also; sometimes they behave no better

379. They can speak English and they have worn Norfolk jackets and, therefore, claim the right to force their way in and command seating accommodation

380. I have turned the searchlight all over, and as you have given me the privilege of speaking to you, I am laying my heart bare

381. Surely we must set these things right in our progress towards self-government

382. I now introduce you to another scene

383. His Highness the Maharaja who presided yesterday over our deliberations spoke about the poverty of India

384. Other speakers laid great stress upon it

385. But what did we witness in the great pandal in which the foundation ceremony was performed by the Viceroy

386. Certainly a most gorgeous show, an exhibition of jewellery, which made a splendid feast for the eyes of the greatest jeweler who chose to come from Paris

387. I compare with the richly bedecked noble men the millions of the poor

388. I would undertake, at the peril of my life, to bring to you a message from King George himself that he excepts nothing of the kind

389. Higginbotham told us last night in his own felicitous language, that they are the men who grow two blades of grass in the place of one

390. But there cannot be much spirit of self-government about us, if we take away or allow others to take away from them almost the whole of the results of their labour

391. Our salvation can only come through the farmer

392. Neither the lawyers, nor the doctors, nor the rich landlords are going to secure it

393. Now, last but not the least, it is my bounden duty to refer to what agitated our minds during these two or three days

394. All of us have had many anxious moments while the Viceroy was going through the streets of Banaras

395. There were detectives stationed in many places

396. We asked ourselves, "Why this distrust?" Is it not better that even Lord Hardinge should die than live a living death

397. But a representative of a mighty sovereign may not

398. He might find it necessary to impose these detectives on us

399. We may foam, we may fret, we may resent, but let us not forget that India of today in her impatience has produced an army of anarchists

400. I myself am an anarchist, but of another type

401. But there is a class of anarchists amongst us, and if I was able to reach this class, I would say to them that their anarchism has no room in India, if India is to conqueror

402. If we trust and fear God, we shall have to fear no one, not the Maharajas, not the Viceroys, not the detectives, not even King George

403. I honour the anarchist for his love of the country

404. I honour him for his bravery in being willing to die for his country; but I ask him-is killing honourable

405. Is the dagger of an assassin a fit precursor of an honourable death

406. There is no warrant for such methods in any scriptures

407. If I found it necessary for the salvation of India that the English should retire, that they should be driven out, I would not hesitate to declare that they would have to go, and I hope I would be prepared to die in defense of that belief

408. That would, in my opinion, be an honourable death

409. The bomb-thrower creates secret plots, is afraid to come out into the open, and when caught pays the penalty of misdirected zeal

410. I have been told, "Had we not done this, had some people not thrown bombs, we should never have gained what we have got with reference to the partition movement." (Mrs

411. Besant : 'Please stop it.') This was what I said in Bengal when Mr

412. I think what I am saying is necessary

413. If I am told to stop I shall obey

414. (Turning to the Chairman) I await your orders

415. If you consider that by my speaking as I am, I am not serving the country and the empire I shall certainly stop

416. (Cries of 'Go on.') (The Chairman: 'Please, explain your object.') I am simply

417. My friends, please do not resent this interruption

418. Besant this evening suggests that I should stop, she does so because she loves India so well, and she considers that I am erring in thinking audibly before you young men

419. But even so, I simply say this, that I want to purge India of this atmosphere of suspicion on either side, if we are to reach our goal; we should have an empire which is to be based upon mutual love and mutual trust

420. Is it not better that we talk under the shadow of this college than that we should be talking irresponsibly in our homes

421. I consider that it is much better that we talk these things openly

422. I have done so with excellent results before now

423. I know that there is nothing that the students do not know

424. I am, therefore, turning the searchlight towards ourselves

425. I hold the name of my country so dear to me that I exchange these thoughts with you, and submit to you that there is no room for anarchism in India

426. Let us frankly and openly say whatever we want to say our rulers, and face the consequences if what we have to say does not please them

427. I was talking the other day to a member of the much-abused Civil Service

428. I have not very much in common with the members of that Service, but I could not help admiring the manner in which he was speaking to mw

429. Gandhi, do you for one moment suppose that all we, Civil Servants, are a bad lot, that we want to oppress the people whom we have come to govern?" "No", I said

430. "Then if you get an opportunity put in a word for the much-abused Civil Service." And I am here to put in that word

431. Yes, many members of the Indian Civil Service are most decidedly overbearing; they are tyrannical, at times thoughtless

432. Many other adjectives may be used

433. I grant all these things and I grant also that after having lived in India for a certain number of years some of them become somewhat degraded

434. They were gentlemen before they came here, and if they have lost some of the moral fiber, it is a reflection upon ourselves

435. Just think out for yourselves, if a man who was good yesterday has become bad after having come in contact with me, is he responsible that he has deteriorated or am I

436. The atmosphere of sycophancy and falsity that surrounds them on their coming to India demoralizes them, as it would many of us

437. It is well to take the blame sometimes

438. If we are to receive self-government, we shall have to take it

439. We shall never be granted self-government

440. Look at the history of the British Empire and the British nation; freedom loving as it is, it will not be a party to give freedom to a people who will not take it themselves

441. Learn your lesson if you wish to from the Boer War

442. Those who were enemies of that empire only a few years ago have now become friends

443. (At this point there was an interruption and a movement on the platform to leave

444. The speech, therefore, ended here abruptly.) Mahatma, pp

445. The 'Quit India' Speech (8.8.1942) {Gandhiji addressed the A.I.C.C

446. I ask you to consider it from my point of view, because if you approve of it, you will be enjoined to carry out all I say

447. It will be a great responsibility

448. There are people who ask me whether I am the same man that I was in 1920, or whether there has been any change in me

449. You are right in asking that question

450. Let me, however, hasten to assure that I am the same Gandhi as I was in 1920

451. I have not changed in any fundamental respect

452. I attach the same importance to nonviolence that I did then

453. If at all, my emphasis on it has grown stronger

454. There is no real contradiction between the present resolution and my previous writings and utterances

455. Occasions like the present do not occur in everybody's and but rarely in anybody's life

456. I want you to know and feel that there is nothing but purest Ahimsa in all that I am saying and doing today

457. The draft resolution of the Working Committee is based on Ahimsa, the contemplated struggle similarly has its roots in Ahimsa

458. If, therefore, there is any among you who has lost faith in Ahimsa or is wearied of it, let him not vote for this resolution

459. Let me explain my position clearly

460. God has vouchsafed to me a priceless gift in the weapon of Ahimsa

461. I and my Ahimsa are on our trail today

462. If in the present crisis, when the earth is being scorched by the flames of Hims2 and crying for deliverance, I failed to make use of the God given talent, God will not forgive me and I shall be judged unwrongly of the great gift

463. I may not hesitate and merely look on, when Russia and China are threatened

464. Ours is not a drive for power, but purely a nonviolent fight for India's independence

465. In a violent struggle, a successful general has been often known to effect a military coup and to set up a dictatorship

466. But under the Congress scheme of things, essentially nonviolent as it is, there can be no room for dictatorship

467. A non-violent soldier of freedom will covet nothing for himself, he fights only for the freedom of his country

468. The Congress is unconcerned as to who will rule, when freedom is attained

469. The power, when it comes, will belong to the people of India, and it will be for them to decide to whom it placed in the entrusted

470. May be that the reins will be placed in the hands of the Parsis, for instance-as I would love to see happen-or they may be handed to some others whose names are not heard in the Congress today

471. It will not be for you then to object saying, "This community is microscopic

472. That party did not play its due part in the freedom's struggle; why should it have all the power?" Ever since its inception the Congress has kept itself meticulously free of the communal taint

473. It has thought always in terms of the whole nation and has acted accordingly

474. I know how imperfect our Ahimsa is and how far away we are still from the ideal, but in Ahimsa there is no final failure or defeat

475. I have faith, therefore, that if, in spite of our shortcomings, the big thing does happen, it will be because God wanted to help us by crowning with success our silent, unremitting Sadhana1 for the last twenty-two years

476. I believe that in the history of the world, there has not been a more genuinely democratic struggle for freedom than ours

477. I read Carlyle's French Resolution while I was in prison, and Pandit Jawaharlal has told me something about the Russian revolution

478. But it is my conviction that inasmuch as these struggles were fought with the weapon of violence they failed to realize the democratic ideal

479. In the democracy which I have envisaged, a democracy established by nonviolence, there will be equal freedom for all

480. Everybody will be his own master

481. It is to join a struggle for such democracy that I invite you today

482. Once you realize this you will forget the differences between the Hindus and Muslims, and think of yourselves as Indians only, engaged in the common struggle for independence

483. Then, there is the question of your attitude towards the British

484. I have noticed that there is hatred towards the British among the people

485. The people say they are disgusted with their behaviour

486. The people make no distinction between British imperialism and the British people

487. To them, the two are one This hatred would even make them welcome the Japanese

488. It means that they will exchange one slavery for another

489. We must get rid of this feeling

490. Our quarrel is not with the British people, we fight their imperialism

491. The proposal for the withdrawal of British power did not come out of anger

492. We cannot evoke the true spirit of sacrifice and velour, so long as we are not free

493. I know the British Government will not be able to withhold freedom from us, when we have made enough self-sacrifice

494. We must, therefore, purge ourselves of hatred

495. Speaking for myself, I can say that I have never felt any hatred

496. As a matter of fact, I feel myself to be a greater friend of the British now than ever before

497. One reason is that they are today in distress

498. My very friendship, therefore, demands that I should try to save them from their mistakes

499. As I view the situation, they are on the brink of an abyss

500. It, therefore, becomes my duty to warn them of their danger even though it may, for the time being, anger them to the point of cutting off the friendly hand that is stretched out to help them

501. People may laugh, nevertheless that is my claim

502. At a time when I may have to launch the biggest struggle of my life, I may not harbour hatred against anybody

503. II [Gandhiji's address before the A.I.C.C

504. at Bombay on 8-8-'42 delivered in Hindustani:]
I congratulate you on the resolution that you have just passed

505. In doing so, they had nothing to be ashamed of

506. For the last twenty years we have tried to learn not to lose courage even when we are in a hopeless minority and are laughed at

507. We have learned to hold on to our beliefs in the confidence that we are in the right

508. It behaves us to cultivate this courage of conviction, for it ennobles man and raises his moral stature

509. I was, therefore, glad to see that these friends had imbibed the principle which I have tried to follow for the last fifty years and more

510. Having congratulated them on their courage, let me say that what they asked this Committee to accept through their amendments was not the correct representation of the situation

511. These friends ought to have pondered over the appeal made to them by the Maulana to withdraw their amendments; they should have carefully followed the explanations given by Jawaharlal

512. Had they done so, it would have been clear to them that the right which they now want the Congress to concede has already been conceded by the Congress

513. Time was when every Mussalman claimed the whole of India as his motherland

514. During the years that the Ali brothers were with me, the assumption underlying all their talks and discussions was that India belonged as much to the Mussalmans as to the Hindus

515. I can
testify to the fact that this was their innermost conviction and nor a mask; I lived with them for years

516. I spent days and nights in their company

517. And I make bold to say that their utterances were the honest expression of their beliefs

518. I know 
there are some who say that I take things too readily at their face value, that I am gullible

519. I do not think I am such a simpleton, nor am I so gullible as these friends take me to be

520. But their criticism does not hurt me

521. I should prefer to be considered gullible rather deceitful

522. What these Communist friends proposed through their amendments is nothing new

523. It has been repeated from thousands of platforms

524. Thousands of Mussalmans have told me, that if Hindu-Muslim question was to be solved satisfactorily, it must be done in my lifetime

525. I should feel flattered at this; but how can I agree to proposal which does not appeal to my reason

526. Hindu-Muslim unity is not a new thing

527. Millions of Hindus and Mussalmans have sought after it

528. I consciously strove for its achievement from my boyhood

529. While at school, I made it a point to cultivate the friendship of Muslims and Parsi co-students

530. I believed even at that tender age that the Hindus in India, if they wished to live in peace and amity with the other communities, should assiduously cultivate the virtue of neighbourliness

531. It did not matter, I felt, if I made no special effort to cultivate the friendship with Hindus, but I must make friends with at least a few Mussalmans

532. It was as counsel for a Mussalmans merchant that I went to South Africa

533. I made friends with other Mussalmans there, even with the opponents of my client, and gained a reputation for integrity and good faith

534. I had among my friends and co-workers Muslims as well as Parsis

535. I captured their hearts and when I left finally for India, I left them sad and shedding tears of grief at the separation

536. In India too I continued my efforts and left no stone unturned to achieve that unity

537. It was my life-long aspiration for it that made me offer my fullest co-operation to the 
Mussalmans in the Khilafat movement

538. Muslims throughout the country accepted me as their true friend

539. How then is it that I have now come to be regarded as so evil and detestable

540. Had I any axe to grind in supporting the Khilafat movement

541. True, I did in my heart of hearts cherish a hope that it might enable me to save the cow

542. I believe the cow and myself to be the creation of the same God, and I am prepared to sacrifice my life in order to save the cow

543. But, whatever my philosophy of life and my ultimate hopes, I joined the movement in no spirit of bargain

544. I co-operated in the struggle for the Khilafat solely on order to discharge my obligation to my neighbour who, I saw, was in distress

545. The Ali brothers, had they been alive today, would have testified to the truth of this assertion

546. And so would many others bear me out in that it was not a bargain on my part for saving the cow

547. As an honest man, a true neighbour and a faithful friend, it was incumbent on me to stand by the Mussalmans in the hour of their trial

548. In those days, I shocked the Hindus by dinning time they have now got used to it

549. Maulana Bari told me, however, that through he would not allow me dine with him, lest some day he should be accused of a sinister motive

550. And so, whenever I had occasion to stay with him, he called a Brahmana cook and made social arrangements for separate cooking

551. Firangi ,Mahal, his residence, was an old-styled structure with limited accommodation; yet he cheerfully bore all hardships and carried out his resolve from which I could not dislodge him

552. It was the spirit of courtesy, dignity and nobility that inspired us in those days

553. They respected one another's religious feelings, and considered it a privilege to do so

554. Not a trace of suspicion lurked in anybody's heart

555. Where has all that dignity, that nobility of spirit, disappeared now

556. I should ask all Mussalmans, including Quaid-I-Azam Jinnah, to recall those glorious days and to find out what has brought us to the present impasse

557. Quaid-i-Azam Jinnah himself was at one time a Congressman

558. If today the Congress has incurred his wrath, it is because the canker of suspicion has entered his heart

559. May God bless him with long life, but when I am gone, he will realize and admit that I had no designs on Mussalmans and that I had never betrayed their interests

560. Where is the escape for me, if I injure their cause or betray their interests

561. My life is entirely at their disposal

562. They are free to put an end to it, whenever they wish to do so

563. Assaults have been made on my life in the past, but God has spared me till now, and the assailants have repented for their action

564. But if someone were to shoot me in the belief that he was getting rid of a rascal, he would kill not the real Gandhi, but the one that appeared to him a rascal

565. To those who have been indulging in a campaign of a abuse and vilification I would say, "Islam enjoins you not to revile even an enemy

566. The Prophet treated even enemies with kindness and tried to win them over by his fairness and generosity

567. Are you followers of that Islam or of any other

568. If you are followers of the true Islam, does it behave you to distrust the words of one who makes a public declaration of his faith

569. To me, these abuses are like bullets

570. They can kill me, even as a bullet can put an end to my life

571. But what of those who indulge in abusing

572. For the fair name of Islam, I appeal to you to resist this unceasing campaign of abuse and vilification

573. Maulana Saheb is being made a target for the filthiest abuse

574. Because he refuses to exert on me the pressure of his friendship

575. He realizes that it is a misuse of friendship to seek up to compel a friend to accept as truth what he knows is an untruth

576. To the Quaid-Azam I would say: Whatever is true and valid in the claim for Pakistan is already in your hands

577. What is wrong and untenable is in nobody's gift, so that it can be made over to you

578. Even if someone were to succeed in imposing an untruth on others, he would not be able to enjoy for long the fruits of such a coercion

579. God dislikes pride and keeps away from it

580. God would not tolerate a forcible imposition of an untruth

581. The Quaid-Azam says that he is compelled to say bitter things but that he cannot help giving expression to his thoughts and his feelings

582. Similarly I would say : "I consider myself a friend of Mussalmans

583. Why should I then not give expression to the things nearest to my heart, even at the cost of displeasing them

584. How can I conceal my innermost thoughts from them

585. I should congratulate the Quaid-i-Azam on his frankness in giving expression to his thoughts and feelings, even if they sound bitter to his hearers

586. But even so why should the Mussalmans sitting here be reviled, if they do not see eye to eye with him

587. If millions of Mussalmans are with you can you not afford to ignore the handful of Mussalmans who may appear to you to be misguided

588. Why should one with the following of several millions be afraid of a majority community, or of the minority being swamped by the majority

589. How did the Prophet work among the Arabs and the Mussalmans

590. Did he say he would propagate Islam only when he commanded a majority

591. I appeal to you for the sake of Islam to ponder over what I say

592. There is neither fair play nor justice in saying that the Congress must accept a thing, even if it does not believe in it and even if it goes counter to principles it holds dear

593. Rajaji said:"I do not believe in Pakistan

594. Jinnah asks for it, and it has become an obsession with them

595. Why not then say, "yes" to them just now

596. If I hold the demand to be just, I should concede it this very day

597. I should not agree to it merely in order to placate Jinnah Saheb

598. Many friends have come and asked me to agree to it for the time being to placate Mr

599. Jinnah, disarm his suspicious and to see how he reacts to it

600. But I cannot be party to a course of action with a false promise

601. At any rate, it is not my method." The Congress as no sanction but the moral one for enforcing its decisions

602. It believes that true democracy can only be the outcome of non-violence

603. The structure of a world federation can be raised only on a foundation of non-violence, and violence will have to be totally abjured from world affairs

604. If this is true, the solution of Hindu-Muslim question, too, cannot be achieved by a resort to violence

605. If the Hindus tyrannize over the Mussalmans, with what face will they talk of a world federation

606. It is for the same reason that I do not believe in the possibility of establishing world peace through violence as the English and American statesmen propose to do

607. The Congress has agreed to submitting all the differences to an impartial international tribunal and to abide by its decisions

608. If even this fairest of proposals is unacceptable, the only course that remains open is that of the sword, of violence

609. How can I persuade myself to agree to an impossibility

610. To demand the vivisection of a living organism is to ask for its very life

611. The Congress cannot be party to such a fratricidal war

612. Moonje and Shri Savarkar, believe in the doctrine of the sword may seek to keep the Mussalmans under Hindus domination

613. I do not represent that section

614. You want to kill the Congress which is the goose that lays golden eggs

615. If you distrust the Congress, you may rest assured that there is to be perpetual war between the Hindus and the Mussalmans, and the country will be doomed to continue warfare and bloodshed

616. If such warfare is to be our lot, I shall not live to witness it

617. One thing which was uppermost in my heart I have already dealt with

618. You may take it from me that it is with me a matter of life and death

619. If we Hindus and Mussalmans mean to achieve a heart unity, without the slightest mental reservation on the part of either, we must first unite in the effort to be free from the shackles of this empire

620. If Pakistan after all is to be a portion of India, what objection can there be for Mussalmans against joining this struggle for India's freedom

621. The Hindus and Mussalmans must, therefore, unite in the first instance on the issue of fighting for freedom

622. Jinnah Saheb thinks the war will last long

623. If the war goes on for six months more, how shall we able to save China

624. I, therefore, want freedom immediately, this very night, before dawn, if it can be had

625. Freedom cannot now wait for the realization of communal unity

626. If that unity is not achieved, sacrifices necessary for it will have to be much greater than would have otherwise sufficed

627. But the Congress must win freedom or be wiped out in the effort

628. And forget not that the freedom which the Congress is struggling to achieve will not be for the Congressmen alone but for all the forty cores of the Indian people

629. Congressmen must for ever remain humble servants of the people

630. The Quaid-i-Azam has said that the Muslim League is prepared to take over the rule from the Britishers if they are prepared to hand it over to the Muslim League, for the British took over the empire from the hands of the Muslims

631. This, however, will be Muslim Raj

632. The offer made by Maulana Saheb and by me does not imply establishment of Muslim Raj or Muslim domination

633. The Congress does not believe in the domination of any group or any community

634. It believes in democracy which includes in its orpit Muslims, Hindus, Christians, Parsis, Jews-every one of the communities inhabiting this vast country

635. If Muslim Raj is invetable, then let it be; but how can we give it the stamp of our assent

636. How can we agree to the domination of one community over the others

637. Millions of Mussalmans in this country come from Hindu stock

638. How can their homeland be any other than India

639. My eldest son embraced Islam some years back

640. What would his homeland be-Porbandar or the Punjab

641. I ask the Mussalmans: "If India is not your homeland, what other country do you belong to

642. In what separate homeland would you put my son who embraced Islam?" His mother wrote him a letter after his conversion, asking him if he had on embracing Islam given up drinking which Islam forbids to its follower

643. To those who gloated over the conversion, she wrote to say: "I do not mind his becoming a Mussalmans, so much as his drinking

644. Will you, as pious Mussalmans, tolerate his drinking even after his conversion

645. He has reduced himself to the state of a rake by drinking

646. If you are going to make a man of him again, his conversion will have been turned to good account

647. You will, therefore, please see that he as a Mussalman abjures wine and woman

648. If that change does not come about, his conversion goes in vain and our non-co-operation with him will have to continue." India is without doubt the homeland of all the Mussalmans inhabiting this country

649. Every Mussalman should therefore co-operate in the fight for India's freedom

650. The Congress does not belong to any one class or community; it belongs to the whole nation

651. It is open to Mussalmans to take possession of the Congress

652. They can, if they like, swamp the Congress by their numbers, and can steer it along the course which appeals to them

653. The Congress is fighting not on behalf of the Hindu but on behalf of the whole nation, including the minorities

654. It would hurt me to hear of a single instance of a Mussalman being killed by a Congressman

655. In the coming revolution, Congressmen will sacrifice their lives in order to protect the Mussalman against a Hindu's attack and vice versa

656. It is a part of their creed, and is one of the essentials of non-violence

657. You will be excepted on occasions like these not to lose your heads

658. Every Congressman, whether a Hindu or a Mussalman, owes this duty to the organization to which will render a service to Islam

659. Mutual trust is essential for success in the final nation-wide struggle that is to come

660. I have said that much greater sacrifice will have to be made this time in the wake of our struggle because of the opposition from the Muslim League and from Englishmen

661. You have seen the secret circular issued by Sir Frederick Puckle

662. It is a suicidal course that he has taken

663. It contains an open incitement to organizations which crop up like mushrooms to combine to fight the Congress

664. We have thus to deal with an empire whose ways are crooked

665. Ours is a straight path which we can tread even with our eyes closed

666. That is the beauty of Satyagraha

667. In Satyagraha, there is no place for fraud or falsehood, or any kind of untruth

668. Fraud and untruth today are stalking the world

669. I cannot be a helpless witness to such a situation

670. I have traveled all over India as perhaps nobody in the present age has

671. The voiceless millions of the land saw in me their friend and representative, and I identified myself with them to an extent it was possible for a human being to do

672. I saw trust in their eyes, which I now want to turn to good account in fighting this empire upheld on untruth and violence

673. However gigantic the preparations that the empire has made, we must get out of its clutches

674. How can I remain silent at this supreme hour and hide my light under the bushel

675. Shall I ask the Japanese to tarry awhile

676. If today I sit quite and inactive, God will take me to task for not using up the treasure He had given me, in the midst of the conflagration that is enveloping the whole world

677. Had the condition been different, I should have asked you to wait yet awhile

678. But the situation now has become intolerable, and the Congress has no other course left for it

679. Nevertheless, the actual struggle does not commence this moment

680. You have only placed all your powers in my hands

681. I will now wait upon the Viceroy and plead with him for the acceptance of the Congress demand

682. That process is likely to take two or three weeks

683. What would you do in the meanwhile

684. What is the programme, for the interval, in which all can participate

685. As you know, the spinning wheel is the first thing that occurs to me

686. I made the same answer to the Maulana

687. He would have none of it, though he understood its import later

688. The fourteen fold constructive programme is, of course, there for you to carry out

689. Every one of you should, from this moment onwards, consider yourself a free man or woman, and acts as if you are free and are no longer under the heel of this imperialism

690. It is not a make-believe that I am suggesting to you

691. It is the very essence of freedom

692. The bond of the slave is snapped the moment he consider himself to be a free being

693. He will plainly tell the master: "I was your bond slave till this moment, but I am a slave no longer

694. You may kill me if you like, but if you keep me alive, I wish to tell you that if you release me from the bondage, of your own accord, I will ask for nothing more from you

695. You used to feed and cloth me, though I could have provided food and clothing for myself by my labour

696. I hitherto depended on you instead of on God, for food and raiment

697. But God has now inspired me with an urge for freedom and I am to day a free man, and will no longer depend on you." You may take it from me that I am not going to strike a bargain with the Viceroy for ministries and the like

698. I am not going to be satisfied with anything short of complete freedom

699. May be, he will propose the abolition of salt tax, the drink evil, etc

700. But I will say, "Nothing less than freedom." Here is a mantra, a short one, that I give you

701. You may imprint it on your hearts and let every breath of yours give expression to it

702. We shall either free India or die in the attempt; we shall not live to see the perpetuation of our slavery

703. Every true Congressman or woman will join the struggle with an inflexible determination not to remain alive to see the country in bondage and slavery

704. Keep jails out of your consideration

705. If the Government keep me free, I will not put on the Government the strain of maintaining a large number of prisoners at a time, when it is in trouble

706. Let every man and woman live every moment of his or her life hereafter in the consciousness that he or she eats or lives for achieving freedom and will die, if need be, to attain that goal

707. Take a pledge, with God and your own conscience as witness, that you will no longer rest till freedom is achieved and will be prepared to lay down your lives in the attempt to achieve it

708. He who loses his life will gain it; he who will seek to save it shall lose it

709. Freedom is not for the coward or the faint-hearted

710. I congratulate you on the support you have hitherto given to the national demand

711. I know the restrictions and handicaps under which you have to labour

712. But I would now ask you to snap the chains that bind you

713. It should be the proud privilege of the newspapers to lead and set an example in laying down one's life for freedom

714. You have the pen which the Government can't suppress

715. I know you have large properties in the form of printing presses, etc., and you would be afraid lest the Government should attach them

716. I do not ask you to invite an attachment of the printing-press voluntarily

717. For myself, I would not suppress my pen, even if the press was to be attached

718. As you know my press was attached in the past and returned later on

719. But I do not ask from you that final sacrifice

720. You should now wind up your standing committee, and you may declare that you will give up the pen only when India has won her freedom

721. You may tell Sir Frederick Puckle that he can't except from you a command performance, that his press notes are full of untruth, and that you will refuse to publish them

722. You will openly declare that you are wholeheartedly with the Congress

723. If you do this, you will have changed the atmosphere before the fight actually begins

724. From the Princes I ask with all respect due to them a very small thing

725. I am a well-wisher of the Princes

726. My grandfather refused to salute with his right hand any Prince other than his own

727. But he did not say to the Prince, as I fell he ought to have said, that even his own master could not compel him, his minister, to act against his conscience

728. I have eaten the Prince's salt and I would not be false to it

729. As a faithful servant, it is my duty to warn the Princes that if they will act while I am still alive, the Princes may come to occupy an honourable place in free India

730. In Jawaharlal's scheme of free India, no privileges or the privileged classes have a place

731. Jawaharlal considers all property to be State-owned

732. He wants to reconstruct India according to plan

733. I have kept a place for the Princes and the Zamindars1 in India that I envisage

734. I would ask the Princes in all humility to enjoy through renunciation

735. The Princes may renounce ownership over their properties and become their trustees in the true sense of the term

736. I visualize God in the assemblage of people

737. The Princes may say to their people : "You are the owners and masters of the State and we are your servants." I would ask the Princes to become servants of the people and render to them an account of their own services

738. The empire too bestows power on the Princes, but they should prefer to derive power from their own people; and if they want to indulge in some innocent pleasures, they may seek to do so as servants of the people

739. I do not want the Princes to live as paupers

740. But I would ask them : "Do you want to remain slaves for all time

741. Why should you, instead of paying homage to a foreign power, not accept the sovereignty of your own people?" You may write to the Political Department : "The people are now awake

742. How are we to withstand an avalanche before which even the Large empire are crumbling

743. We, therefore, shall belong to the people from today onwards

744. We shall sink or swim with them." Believe me, there is nothing unconstitutional in the course I am suggesting

745. There are, so far as I know, no treaties enabling the empire to coerce the Princes

746. Nothing, however, should be done secretly

747. In this struggle secrecy is a sin

748. A free man would not engage in a secret movement

749. It is likely that when you gain freedom you will have a C.I.D

750. of your own, in spite of my advice to the contrary

751. But in the present struggle, we have to work openly and to receive bullets on our chest, without taking to heels

752. I have a word to say to Government servants also

753. They may not, if they like, resign their posts yet

754. The late Justice Ranade did not resign his post, but he openly declared that he belonged to the Congress

755. He said to the Government that though he was a judge, he was a Congressman and would openly attend the sessions of the Congress, but that at the same time he would not let his political views warp his impartiality on the bench

756. He held Social Reform Conference in the very Pandal1 of the Congress

757. I would ask all the Government servants to follow in the footsteps of Ranade and to declare their allegiance to the Congress as an answer to the secret circular issued by Sir Frederick Puckle

758. This is all that I ask of you just now

759. I will now write to the Viceroy

760. You will be able to read the correspondence not just now but when I publish it with the Viceroy's consent

761. But you are free to aver that you support the demand to be put forth in my letter

762. A judge came to me and said : "We get secret circulars from high quarters

763. What are we to do?" I replied, "If I were in your place, I would ignore the circulars

764. You may openly say to the Government : 'I have received your secret circular

765. I am, however, with the Congress

766. Though I serve the Government for my livelihood, I am not going to obey these secret circulars or to employ underhand methods,'" Soldiers too are covered by the present programme

767. I do not ask them just now to resign their posts and to leave the army

768. The soldiers come to me, Jawaharlal and the Maulana and say : "We are wholly with you

769. We are tired of the Governmental tyranny." To these soldiers I would say : You may say to the Government, "Our hearts are with the Congress

770. We are not going to leave our posts

771. We will serve you so long as we receive your salaries

772. We will obey your just orders, but will refuse to fire on our own people." To those who lack the courage to do this much I have nothing to say

773. But if you can do this much, you may take it from me that the whole atmosphere will be electrified

774. Let the Government then shower bombs, if they like

775. But no power on earth will then be able to keep you in bondage any longer

776. If the students want to join the struggle only to go back to their studies after a while, I would not invite them to it

777. For the present, however, till the time that I frame a programme for the struggle, I would ask the students to say to their professors : "We belong to the Congress

778. Do you belong to the Congress, or to the Government

779. If you belong to the Congress, you need not vacate your posts

780. You will remain at your posts but teach us and lead us unto freedom." In all fights for freedom, the world over, the students have made very large contributions

781. If in the interval that is left to us before the actual fight begins, you do even the little I have suggested to you, you will have changed the atmosphere and will have prepared the ground for the next step

782. There is much I should et like to say

783. I have already taken up much of your time

784. I have yet to say a few words in English also

785. I thank you for the patience and attention with which you have listened to me even at this late hour

786. It is just what true soldiers would do

787. For the last twenty-two years, I have controlled my speech and pen and have stored up my energy

788. He is a true Brahmacharri1 who does not fritter away his energy

789. He will, therefore, always control his speech

790. That has been my conscious effort all these years

791. But today the occasion has come when I had to unburden my heart before you

792. I have done so, even though it meant putting a strain on your patience; and I do not regret having done it

793. I have given you my message and through you I have delivered it to the whole of India

794. III [The following is the concluding portion of Gandhiji's speech before the A.I.C.C

795. at Bombay on 8-8-`42 which was delivered in English]: I have taken such an inordinately long time over pouring out, what was agitating my soul, to those whom I had just now the privilege of serving

796. I have been called their leader or, in the military language, their commander

797. But I do not look at my position in that light

798. I have no weapon but love to wield my authority over any one

799. I do sport a stick which you can break into bits without the slightest exertion

800. It is simply my staff with the help of which I walk

801. Such a cripple is not elated, when he has been called upon to bear the greatest burden

802. You can share that burden only when I appear before you not as your commander but as a humble servant

803. And he who serves best is the chief among equals

804. Therefore, I was bound to share with you such thoughts as were welling up in my breast and tell you, in as summary a manner as I can, what I except you to do as the first step

805. Let me tell you at the outset that the real struggle does not commence today

806. I have yet to go through much ceremonial as I always do

807. The burden, I confess, would be almost unbearable

808. I have to continue to reason in those circles with whom I have lost my credit and who have no trust left in me

809. I know that in the course of the last few weeks I have forfeited my credit with a large number of friends, so much so, that they have begun to doubt not only my wisdom but even my honesty

810. Now I hold my wisdom is not such a treasure which I cannot afford to lose; but my honesty is a precious treasure to me and I can ill-afford to lose it

811. I seem however to have lost it for the time being

812. Friend of the Empire Such occasions arise in the life of the man who is a pure seeker after truth and who would seek to serve the humanity and his country to the best of his lights without fear or hypocrisy

813. For the last fifty years I have known no other way

814. I have been a humble servant of humanity and have rendered on more than one occasion such services as I could to the Empire, and here let me say without fear of challenge that throughout my career never have I asked for any personal favour

815. I have enjoyed the privilege of friendship as I enjoy it today with Lord Linlithgow

816. It is a friendship which has outgrown official relationship

817. Whether Lord Linlithgow will bear me out, I do not know, but there is a personal bond between him and myself

818. He once introduced me to his daughter

819. he fell in love with Mahadev more than with me and Lady Anna and he came to me

820. She is an obedient and favourite daughter

821. I take interest in their welfare

822. I will have to resist the might of that Empire with the might of the dumb millions with no limit but of nonviolence as policy confined to this struggle

823. It is a terrible job to have to offer resistance to a Viceroy with whom I enjoy such relations

824. He has more than once trusted my word, often about my people

825. I would love to repeat that experiment, as it stands to his credit

826. I mention this with great pride and pleasure

827. I mention it as an earnest of my desire to be true to the Empire when that Empire forfeited my trust and the Englishman who was its Viceroy came to know it

828. Charlie Andrews Then there is the sacred memory of Charlie Andrews which wells up within me

829. At this moment the spirit of Andrews hovers about me

830. For me he sums up the brightest traditions of English culture

831. I enjoyed closer relations with him than with most Indians

832. There were no secrets between us

833. We exchanged our hearts every day

834. Whatever was in his heart, he would blurt out without the slightest hesitation or reservation

835. It is true he was a friend of Gurudev1 but he looked upon Gurudev with awe

836. But with me he became the closest friend

837. Years ago he came to me with a note of introduction from Gokhale

838. Pearson and he were the first-rank specimens of Englishmen

839. I know that his spirit is listening to me

840. Then I have got a warm letter of congratulations from the Metropolitan of Calcutta

841. Voice of Conscience With all this background, I want to declare to the world, although I may have forfeited the regard of many friends in the West and I must bow my head low; but even for their friendship or love I must not suppress the voice of conscience - promoting of my inner basic nature today

842. There is something within me impelling me to cry out my agony

843. I have studied something of psychology

844. Such a man knows exactly what it is

845. I do not mind how you describe it

846. That voice within tells me, "You have to stand against the whole world although you may have to stand alone

847. You have to stare in the face the whole world although the world may look at you with bloodshot eyes

848. Trust the little voice residing within your heart." It says : "Forsake friends, wife and all; but testify to that for which you have lived and for which you have to die

849. I want to live my full span of life

850. And for me I put my span of life at 120 years

851. By that time India will be free, the world will be free

852. Real Freedom Let me tell you that I do not regard England or for that matter America as free countries

853. They are free after their own fashion, free to hold in bondage coloured races of the earth

854. Are England and America fighting for the liberty of these races today

855. If not, do not ask me to wait until after the war

856. You shall not limit my concept of freedom

857. The English and American teachers, their history, their magnificent poetry have not said that you shall not broaden the interpretation of freedom

858. And according to my interpretation of that freedom I am constrained to say they are strangers to that freedom which their teachers and poets have described

859. If they will know the real freedom they should come to India

860. They have to come not with pride or arrogances but in the spite of real earnest seekers of truth

861. It is a fundamental truth which India has been experimenting with for 22 years

862. Congress and Non-violence Unconsciously from its very foundations long ago the Congress has been building on non-violence known as constitutional methods

863. Dadabhai and Pherozeshah who had held the Congress India in the palm of their hands became rebels

864. They were lovers of the Congress

865. But above all they were real servants

866. They never countenanced murder, secrecy and the like

867. I confess there are many black sheep amongst us Congressmen

868. But I trust the whole of India today to launch upon a non-violent struggle

869. I trust because of my nature to rely upon the innate goodness of human nature which perceives the truth and prevails during the crisis as if by instinct

870. But even if I am deceived in this I shall not swerve

871. From its very inception the Congress based its policy on peaceful methods, included Swaraj and the subsequent generations added non-violence

872. When Dadabhai entered the British Parliament, Salisbury dubbed him as a black man; but the English people defeated Salisbury and Dadabhai went to the Parliament by their vote

873. These things however India has outgrown

874. I will go Ahead It is, however, with all these things as the background that I want Englishmen, Europeans and all the United Nations to examine in their hearts what crime had India committed in demanding Independence

875. I ask, is it right for you to distrust such an organization with all its background, tradition and record of over half a century and misrepresent its endeavours before all the world by every means at your command

876. Is it right that by hook or by crook, aided by the foreign press, aided by the President of the U.S.A., or even by the Generalissimo of China who has yet to win his laurels, you should present India's struggle in shocking caricature

877. I have known him through Madame Shek who was my interpreter; and though he seemed inscrutable to me, not so Madame Shek; and he allowed me to read his mind through her

878. There is a chorus of disapproval and righteous protest all over the world against us

879. They say we are erring, the move is inopportune

880. I had great regard for British diplomacy which has enabled them to hold the Empire so long

881. Now it stinks in my nostrils, and others have studied that diplomacy and are putting it into practice

882. They may succeed in getting, through these methods, world opinion on their side for a time; but India will speak against that world opinion

883. She will raise her voice against all the organized propaganda

884. Even if all the United Nations opposed me, even if the whole of India forsakes me, I will say, "You are wrong

885. India will wrench with non-violence her liberty from unwilling hands." I will go ahead not for India's sake alone, but for the sake of the world

886. Even if my eyes close before there is freedom, non-violence will not end

887. They will be dealing a mortal blow to China and to Russia if they oppose the freedom of non-violent India which is pleading with bended knees for the fulfillment of debt along overdue

888. Does a creditor ever go to debtor like that

889. And even when, India is met with such angry opposition, she says, "We won't hit below the belt, we have learnt sufficient gentlemanliness

890. We are pledged to non-violence." I have been the author of non-embarrassment policy of the Congress and yet today you find me talking this strong language

891. I say it is consistent with our honour

892. If a man holds me by the neck and wants to drawn me, may I not struggle to free myself directly

893. There is no inconsistency in our position today

894. Appeal to United nations There are representatives of the foreign press assembled here today

895. Through them I wish to say to the world that the United Powers who somehow or other say that they have need for India, have the opportunity now to declare India free and prove their bona fides

896. If they miss it, they will be missing the opportunity of their lifetime, and history will record that they did not discharge their obligations to India in time, and lost the battle

897. I want the blessings of the whole world so that I may succeed with them

898. I do not want the United Powers to go beyond their obvious limitations

899. I do not want them to accept non-violence and disarm today

900. There is a fundamental difference between fascism and this imperialism which I am fighting

901. Do the British get from India which they hold in bondage

902. Think what difference it would make if India was to participate as a free ally

903. That freedom, if it is to come, must come today

904. It will have no taste left in it today you who have the power to help cannot exercise it

905. If you can exercise it, under the glow of freedom what seems impossible, today, will become possible tomorrow

906. If India feels that freedom, she will command that freedom for China

907. The road for running to Russia's help will be open

908. The Englishmen did not die in Malaya or on Burma soil

909. What shall enable us to retrieve the situation

910. Where shall I go, and where shall I take the forty crores of India

911. How is this vast mass of humanity to be aglow in the cause of world deliverance, unless and until it has touched and felt freedom

912. Today they have no touch of life left

913. It has been crushed out of them

914. It lustre is to be put into their eyes, freedom has to come not tomorrow, but today

915. Do or Die I have pledged the Congress and the Congress will do or die

916. Inter-Asian Relations Conference (2.4.1947) [The closing session of the Inter-Asian Relations Conference held on April 2, 1947 was a great finale to the intense activity which marked the proceedings during the past ten days

917. Over 20,000 visitors and delegates and observers gave a great ovation to Gandhiji when Mrs

918. Naidu introduced him as a 'one of the greatest Asians of the age'

919. Sjahriar, the Premier of Indonesia, made the following speech:] I do not think that I should apologize to you for having to speak in a foreign tongue

920. I wonder if this loud speaker carries my voice to the farthest end of this vast audience

921. If some of those who are far away are unable to listen to what I may say, it will be the fault of the loud speaker

922. I was going to tell you that I do not wish to apologize

923. You cannot understand the provincial language, which is my mother tongue

924. I do not want to insult you by speaking in my own language (Gujarati)

925. Our national speech is Hindustani

926. I know that it will be a long time before it can be made into an international speech

927. For international commerce, undoubtedly, English occupies the first place

928. I used to hear that French was the language of diplomacy

929. I was told, when I was young, that if I wanted to go from one end of Europe to the other, I must try to pick up French

930. I tried to learn French, in order that I may be able to make myself understood

931. There is a rivalry between the French and the English

932. Having been taught English, I have naturally to resort to it

933. I was wondering, as to what I was to speak to you

934. I wanted to collect my thoughts, but, let me confess to you that I had no time

935. Yet I had promised yesterday that I would try to say a few words

936. While I was coming with Badshah Khan, I asked for a little piece of paper and pencil

937. I got a pen, instead of a pencil

938. I tried to scribble a few words

939. You will be sorry to hear that piece of paper is not by my side, though I remember what I wanted to say

940. You, friends, have not seen the real India and you are not meeting in conference in the midst of real India

941. Delhi, Bombay, Madras, Calcutta, Lahore-all these are big cities and are, therefore, influenced by the West

942. It was in French and was translated for me by an Anglo-French philosopher

943. He befriended me without having known me, because he always sided with the minorities

944. I was not then in my own country

945. I was not only in a hopeless minority, but in a despised minority, if the Europeans in South Africa will forgive me for saying so

946. At the time, we had no coolie doctors, and we had no coolie lawyers

947. You know, perhaps, what is meant by the word 'coolie'

948. This friend - his mother was a French woman and his father was an Englishmen - said: "I want to translate for you a French story

949. There were three scientists who went out from France in search of truth

950. They went to different parts of Asia

951. One of them found his way to India

952. He went to the so-called cities of those times - naturally this was before British occupation, before even the Mogul period

953. He saw the so-called high caste people, men and women, till he felt at a loss

954. Finally, he went to one humble cottage and there he found the truth that he was in search of." If you really want to see India villages at its best, you have to find it in the humble bhangi homes of such villages

955. There are seven lakhs of such villages, and thirty-eighty crores of people inhabit them

956. If some of you see the Indian villages, you will not be fascinated by the sight

957. You will have to scratch below the dung heap

958. I do not pretend to say that they were places of paradise

959. Today, they are really dung heaps

960. What I say is not from history, but from what I have seen myself

961. I have traveled from one end of India to the other, and I have seen the miserable specimens of humanity with the lustreless eyes

962. In these humble cottages, in the midst of these dung heaps, are to be found humble bhangis, in whom you find the concentrated essence of wisdom

963. Again, I have learnt from books - books written by English historians

964. We read books written in English historians, but we do not write in our own mother tongue, or in the national language Hindustani

965. We study our history through English books, rather than through originals

966. That is the cultural conquest which India has undergone

967. The first of these wise men was Zoroaster

968. He was followed by Buddha who belonged to the East - India

969. Before Jesus was Moses who belonged to Palestine, though he was born in Egypt

970. I omit my reference to Krishna and Rama and other lights

971. I do not call them lesser lights but they are lees known a single person in the world to match these men of Asia

972. Christianity became disfigured, when it went to the West

973. I am sorry to have to say that - I would not talk any further

974. I have told you the story, in order to make you understand that what you see in the big cities is not the real India

975. Certainly, the carnage that is going on before our very eyes is a shameful thing

976. As I said yesterday, do not carry the memory of that carnage beyond the confines of India

977. What I want you to understand is the message of Asia

978. It is not to be learnt through the western spectacles or by imitating the atom bomb

979. If you want to give a message of truth

980. I do not want merely to appeal to your head

981. In this age of democracy, in this age of awakening of the poorest of the poor, you can redeliver this message with the greatest emphasis

982. You will complete the conquest of the West, not through vengeance, because you have been exploited, but with real understanding

983. I am sanguine, if all of you put your hearts together - not merely heads - to understand the secret of the message these wise men of the East have left to us, and us if we really become worthy of that great message, the conquest of the West will be completed

984. This conquest will be loved by the West itself

985. The West is today pinning for wisdom

986. It is despairing of a multiplication of the atom bombs, because the atom bombs mean utter destruction, not merely of the West, but of the whole world, as if the prophecy of the Bible is going to be fulfilled and there is to be a perfect deluge

987. It is up to you to tell the world of its wickedness and sin - that is the heritage your teachers and my teachers have taught Asia

988. On the eve of last fast (12.1.1948) My Fast as a Protest One fasts for health's sake under laws governing health, fasts as a penance for a wrong done and felt as such

989. In these fasts, the fasting one need not believe in Ahimsa

990. here is, however, a fast which a votary of non-violence sometimes feels impelled to undertake by way of protest against some wrong done by society, and this he does when as a votary of Ahimsa has no other remedy left

991. Such an occasion has come my way

992. When on September 9th, I returned to Delhi from Calcutta, it was to proceed to the West Punjab

993. Gay Delhi looked a city of the dead

994. As I alighted from the train I observed gloom on every face I saw

995. Even the Sardar, whom humour and the joy that humour gives never desert, was no exception this time

996. He was on the platform to receive me

997. He lost no time in giving me the sad news of the disturbances that had taken place in the Metropolis of the Union

998. At once I saw that I had to be in Delhi and 'do or die'

999. There is a apparent calm brought about by prompt military and police action

1000. But there is storm within the breast

1001. This I count as no fulfillment of the vow to 'do' which alone can keep me from death, the incomparable friend

1002. I yearn for heart friendship between the Hindus, the Sikhs and the Muslims

1003. It subsisted between them the other day

1004. It is a state that no Indian patriot worthy of the name can contemplate with equanimity

1005. Though the Voice within has been beckoning for a long time, I have been shutting my ears to it, lest it may be the voice of Satan otherwise called my weakness

1006. I never like to feel resourceless, a Satyagrahi never should

1007. Fasting is his last resort in the place of the sword - his or other's

1008. I have no answer to return to the Muslim friends who see me from day to day as to what they should do

1009. My impotence has been gnawing at me of late

1010. It will go immediately the fast is undertaken

1011. I have been brooding over it for the last three days

1012. The final conclusion has flashed upon me and it makes me happy

1013. No man, if he is pure has anything more precious to give than his life

1014. I hope and pray that I have that purity in me to justify the step

1015. Worthy of Blessing I ask you all to bless the effort and to pray for me and with me

1016. The fast begins from the first meal tomorrow

1017. The period is indefinite and I may drink water with or without salts and sour limes

1018. It will end when and if I am satisfied that there is a reunion of hearts of all the communities brought about without any outside pressure, but from an awakened sense of duty

1019. The reward will be the regaining of India's dwindling prestige and her fast fading sovereignty over the heart of Asia and there through the world

1020. I flatter myself with belief that the loss of the hope of the aching, storm-tossed and hungry world

1021. Let no friend, or foe if there be one, be angry with me

1022. There are friends who do not believe in the method of the fast for the reclamation of the human mind

1023. They will bear with me and extent to me the same liberty of action that they claim for themselves

1024. With God as my supreme, and sole counsellor, I felt that I must take the decision without any other adviser

1025. If I made a mistake and discover it, I shall have no hesitation in proclaiming it from the housetop and retracing my faulty step

1026. There is clear indication, as I claim there is, of the Inner Voice, it will not be gainsaid

1027. I plead for all absence of argument and inevitable endorsement of the step

1028. If the whole of India responds or at least Delhi does, the fast might be soon ended

1029. No Softness But whether it ends soon or late or never, let there be no softness in dealing with what may be termed as a crisis

1030. Critics have regarded some of my previous fasts as coercive and held that on merits the verdict would have gone against my stand but for the pressure exercised by the fasts

1031. What value can an adverse verdict have when the purpose is demonstrably sound

1032. A pure fast, like duty, is its own reward

1033. I do not embark upon it for the sake of the result it may bring

1034. Hence, I urge everybody dispassionately to examine the purpose and let me die, if I must, in peace which I hope is ensured

1035. Death for me would be a glorious deliverance rather than that I should be a helpless witness of the destruction of India, Hinduism, Sikhism and Islam

1036. That destruction is certain if Pakistan ensures no equality of status and security of life and property for all professing the various faiths of the world, and if India copies her

1037. Only then Islam dies in the two India's, not in the world

1038. But Hinduism and Sikhism have no world outside India

1039. Those who differ from me will be honoured by me for their resistance however implacable

1040. Let my fast quicken conscience, not deaden it

1041. Just contemplate the rot that has set in beloved India and you will rejoice to think that there is a humble son of hers who is strong enough and possibly pure enough to take the happy step

1042. If he is neither, he is a burden on earth

1043. The sooner he disappears and clears the Indian atmosphere of the burden the better for him and all concerned

1044. I would beg of all friends not to rush to Birla House nor try to dissuade me or be anxious for me

1045. Rather, they should turn the searchlights inwards, for this is essentially a testing time for all of us

1046. Those who remain at their post of duty and perform it diligently and well, now more so than hitherto, will help me and the cause in every way

1047. The fast is a process of self-purification

1048. FAMOUS LETTERS OF MA.HATMA GANDHI < OMPU.bD & l'Dl'fED B~ R. L. KHlPPLE, M. A

1049. I With the exception of those written to the inmates of Sabarmati Ashram, which are rather personal in

1050. nature, all others are of immense significance to a student of Indian politics

1051. He is considered to be one of the most outspoken, fearless and 'seditious' writers of India, but a spirit of humanity and fellow~feeling permeates through all his letters

1052. In spite of a marked sense of revolt against the British Government, his letters indicate a strong desire to maintain peace at all costs

1053. The Mahatma doeS not hate the British people ; 'he only desires British Imperialism to go

1054. When you read them, your heart throbs with emotion and you feel one with the Mahatma in condemning British Diplomacy in India

1055. This golden sheaf of the letters of Mahatma~ Gandhi combines in itself the elements of a biography, political history and patriotic exhorta- tion

1056. As such thev are s-qre to catch the intt're~t of all who want to have a recollection of India's freedom movement at its various stages, and others who are interested in the 11fe and work of Mahatmta

1057. Gandhi and still others who just need a mental p~'U to stimulate patriotic sentiments

1058. ': In the end I am grateful to Mr

1059. Shanti Parkash Kohli who gave me all possible help in 1he compilation of these documents and also in getting the tnartuscript typed

1060. R. L. KHlP:PLE 23rd February, 1947

1061. 71, Royal Park, Lahore TABLE OF CONTENTS 1

1062. Gandhi-a SborL Biograpltical Sketch

1063. To Every Ex1glishman living in lndia

1064. 'l'o His Royal Highne~os, the Duke of Con naught 9.

1065. Ultimatum to J...ord Reading 10

1066. Letters to the Inmat~s of Sabarmati Ashram ~ I To Mira Bai'=' ) II General letter t~ all the Inmates 13

1067. Ill 'fo 'Ba' (:Kasturba Gandhi) IV To L

1068. akshmi, Gandhiji's liUlt' ,1dopted  untouchable ' daugh- ter and other little children tlf the Asbram

1069. ,  First Rejoinder Second R.Pjoin

1070.  . 9 t3 20 26 33 99 44 50 56 68 76 77 78 HI> 81 82 ii CONTENfS 15

1071. To Sir Samuel Ht~are-Sec1etary of State !or India in 19S2 ..

1072. To Ramsay MacDonald-British Prime Minister in 1932

1073. M A. Jinnah, the PrcsidenL of the Muslim League

1074. To Marshal Chiang Kai Sheck- The Chinese Generalissimo

1075. To the People of America 117 21

1076. To Sir Richards 148 MAHATMA GANDHi

1077. (A short biographical sketch.) Mohanlal Karamchand Gandhi, now famous as Mahatma Gandhi, was born m the year 1869 in an orthodox Gujerati family known for their loyalty to the various Kathia war States

1078. His father was the Prime Mini~~e~ of Rajkot and his grand father was the Prime Minister of Porbander

1079. The story goes that on one occasion, consequent to some mtrigues, his grand father was required to take refuge in a neighbouring State, where he saluted the Ruler with his left hand

1080. On being questioned about it he replied that his right hand was pledged to Porbande1.

1081. Mahatma Gandhi seems to have inherited his deep rooted religious sense from his mother, who was known to be a lady of simple and pious habits and of deep devotional mind, and was renowned for her regularity m v1s1ting the temple almost daily

1082. Mahatma Gandhi was married at the early age of 12 years to Kasturba and se"*'en years after their ma~riage, at the age of 19 years, he left for England for hi1ther studies in Law

1083. After finishing his stUdies 1(j Famous Letters of Mahatma Gandhi

1084. It was there, in South Africa, that the seeds lf his political career were sown

1085. There were, at that time, .about 1,50,000 Indians in that country, whom Gandhiji fotmd living virtually in a state of semi-slavery, subjected to a pernicious colour bar with many political and social barriers

1086. His struggle in South Africa for the emancipation of Indians in that country was one of his earliest, encounters with 'White Imperialism'

1087. He fought a valourous campaign of non-violent passive resistance in S. Africa with such a spirit of consistency and sacrifice that the haughty General Smuts had to come round to a settlement with the non-violent In,dian resister

1088. From S. Africa, Gandhiji returned to India with his faith in British justice greatly shaken

1089. In spite of her great sacrifices India was not given the promised Home Rule, and instead of that big crowds of Indian patriots were subjected to indiscri- minate machine-gunr'ling-that was the reward for loyalty to British cause l Conse

1090. quently a wave of indiltnation ran across the country ; Hindus and Mahatma Gandhi-~'!

1091. 11 Muslims joined hands together in their determina- tion to weed out the foreign rule from India

1092. Gandhiji was sentenced to 6 years' imprisonment

1093. Ten years later he started another campaign for India's freedom, resulting ultimately in a pact between him and the then Viceroy-known as Gandhi-Irwin pact

1094. Soon after in response to an invitation from the British diplomats he went to England to present India's case in the Round Table Conference held there at that tilne

1095. He was, however, once again disillusioned by false British pretences

1096. Everything ended in smoke and the ' lathi' and ~he bullet, and Martial Law ruled, India for the next two years

1097. In 1942 he was in a way the initiator of the August Movement which although put down by British bayonets, will nevertheless go in the annals of Indian political history as a great uprising of a brave people for their own liberation

1098. Besides politics, social and religious reform are the other interests of Gandhiji's life

1099. He has been taking special pains to alleviate thcr sufferings of women and untouchables and has endeavoured his utmost in the direction of brin~in~ about ft new 12 Famous LetteTs of Mahatma Gandhi

1100. Gandhiji in short is a politician, a saint, a social reformer and a consttuctive philosopher all combmed in a frall httl~ person

1101. LETTER TO LORD CHELMSFORD. (During the perwd of Great War 1 a War Con[ erence was called at Delhi by the British Diplomats to which Mahatma Gandhi was invited

1102. One of the reasons for his refusal to join it was that Lokamanya Tilak, Mrs

1103. Annie Besant and Ali Brothers whom he considered to be very powerful leaders of the country, were not invited

1104. After a personal interview with he then Viceroy of India, Gandhiji came round to join the conference

1105. One of my reasons for absentation and perhaps the strongest was that Lok- amanya Tilak, Mrs

1106. Besantand the Ali Brother, whom Iregardasamongthe most powerful leaders of pubhc opinion were not invitad to the Conference

1107. I venture to submit that no Government can afford to disregard the leaders, who represent the large masses of the people as these do, even though they may hold views funda- mentally different

1108. At the same time it gives me pleasure to be able to say that the views of all parties were permitted to be freely exoressed at the Letter to Lord Chelmsford

1109. 15 Committees of the Conference

1110. For my part, I purposely rehamed from stating my views at the Committee at which I had the honour of servingl or at the Conference itself

1111. I felt that I could best serve the objects of the Conference by simply tender- mg my support to the resolutions submitted to it and thts I have done without any reservation

1112. I recognise that in the hour of its danger we must give, as we have decided to give, ungrudging and unequivocal support to the Empire of which w~ aspire in the near future to be partners in the same sense as the Dominioljl.s Overseas

1113. But it 1s the simple truth that our response is due to the expectation that our goal will be reached all th~ more speedily

1114. If I could make my countrymen retrace t\J.eir steps I would make them withdraw all the Congress resolutions and not whisper" Home Rule" or " Responsible Government " during the pendency of the War

1115. I would make India offer all her able bodied sons as a sacrifice to the Emptre at its critical moment and I know that India, by this -very act, would become the most favoured partner in the Empir~ and racial distinctions would become a thing of the past

1116. But practically the whole ot educated India has decided to take a less eHectJve course, and it is no longer possible to say that educated India does not exercise any influence on the 1nasses

1117. I have been coming into most intimate touch with the rai)ats ever since my return from South Africa to India, and I wish to assure you th~t the desire for Home Rule has widely penetrated them

1118. I was present at the sessions of the last Congress and I was a party to the resolution that tull Responsible Government should be granted to British India '~ithin a period to be fixed definitely by a Parlia- mentary Statute

1119. I adroit that it 1S a bold step to take, but I feel sure that nothing less than a definite visio11 of Home Rule to he realised

1120. I know that there are many in India who consider no sacrifice- is too Jlreat in order to achieve the end; Letter to Lord Chemlsford

1121. 17 :md they ar~ wakeful enough to realise that they nust be equally prepared to sacrifice themselves tor the Empir::: in which they hope and desire to reach tl,eir final status

1122. It follows then: that we can but accelerat~ uur' journey to the goal by silently and s1mply devvting outselves heart and soul to the \Vork of delivering the Empire from the threaten- Ing danger

1123. We much perceive that if we serve to save the Empire, we have tn that very act secured Home Rule

1124. it 1s cleat to me that we should give to the Empire every available man for its defence

1125. My intimate intercourse with the rai'Yats convinces me that India has already donated to the Impetial Exchequer beyond her capacity

1126. in making this statement, I am voicing the opinion of the majority of my country men

1127. The conference means for me, and l believe for many o us, a definite step in the consecration of ou.r lives to the common cause, but ours is a peculiar position

1128. We are today o~tside the partnership

1129. Ours is a consecration based on hope o better future

1130. r should be untrue to you and to my country if r 18 Famous Letters of Mahatma Gandhi

1131. I do not bargain or its fulfilment, but you should know that disappointment of hope- means disillusion

1132. You have appealed to us to sink domestiC d1fferences

1133. If appeal involves the toleration of tyranny and wrongdoings on the part of officials, I am powerless to tespond

1134. In Champaran by resisting an age- long tyranny I have shown the ultimate sovereignty of British Justice

1135. In Kaira, a population that was: cursing the Government now feels that it, and not the Government, is the power when it is prepared to suffer for the truth it represents

1136. losing its bitterness and is saying to itself that the Government must be a Government for people, fo1 it tolerates orderly and respectful disobedience \V here injustice is felt Thus Champaran and Kaira affairs .are my direct, definite and special contribution to the War

1137. Ask me to suspend my activities in that .direction ana you ask me to suspend my life

1138. If I could popularise the \!Se of soul force which is but another name for love for-ce in place of brute force, I ik..raow .that I .could present you with an India that Letter to Lord Chelmsford

1139. 19 could defy the whole world to its worst

1140. the1efore, I shall discipline myselt to express in my hfe this eternal law of suffering and present it for acceptance to those who care and if I

1141. take part many other activity, the motive is to show the matchless supedonty of that law

1142. Lastly, I would hke you to ask His Majesty's Mimsters eo g1ve definite assurance about Moham- medan States

1143. I am sure you know that evety Mohammedan 1s deeply interested in them

1144. As a Hindu, I cannot be indifferent to their cause

1145. In the most scrupulous regard for the rights of those States and for the Muslim sentiment, as to the places of worship and your just and t1mely treatment of Indian claim to Home Rule, lies the safety of the Empire

1146. I write this, because I love the English Nation, and I wish to evoke in every Indian the looyalt-, of Engbshmen

1147. ULTIMATUM TO LORD CHELMSFORD. (When the Great War 1 was over, a Turkish Peace Treaty was signed at Paris, whereby Turkey was to be .dismembered and only Constantinople with a fringe of teT'ritory for defence purposes was conceded to the Sultan

1148. During rhe course of the War, Lloyd George the then British

1149. Prime Minister had assured the Muslim world tha.t Turke, would not be deprived of the Tich lands of Asia Minor and Thrace, and the above treaty was a cruel violation of these assurances and promises

1150. The Mussalmans of India were therefo,e enraged at this' twist' of the British diplomacy

1151. Mahatama Gandhi at that time gave his full support to the Mu.~lim cause and advised the Mussalmans of India to withdraw their support from the Viceroy's Government

1152. At the very earliest stage of the War, even while I was in London organising the Indian Vohi.n- teer Ambulance Corps, I began to interest myself in the Khilafat question

1153. On my arrival in January of 1915 I found the same anxiousness and earnestness among the Mussalmans with whom I came in contact

1154. Even at that moment I advised my Mussal- man friends not to give way to despair but to express their ears and their hopes in a disciplined manner 22 Famous Letters of Mahatma Gandhi

1155. terms and Your Excellency's defence of them have given the Mussalmans of India a shock from which it will be difficult for them to 1ecover

1156. The terms violate the ministerial pledges and utterly disregard Mussalman's sentiments

1157. I consider that, as a staunch Hindu wishing to live on terms of the closest friendship with my Mussalman countrymen, I should be an unworthy son of India if I did not stand by them in their hour of trial

1158. Muslim soldier did not :fight to inflict punishment on their own Khalifa or to deprive him of his territories

1159. M:Y duty to the Empire, to which I owe my loyalty, requires me to resist the cruel violence that has been done to the Mussalman sentiment so far as I am aware

1160. Mussalmans and Hindus have, as a whole, lost faith in British justice and honour

1161. 23 The report of the majority of the Hunter Committee, Your Excellency's despatch thereon and Mr

1162. Montagu's reply have only aggravated the distrust

1163. I have not lost faith in such superiority and I am not without hope that somehow or other justice will yet be rendered if we show the requisite capacity for :mffering

1164. Indeed, my concept10n of that constitution is that it helps only those who are ready to help themselves

1165. Three courses were open to the 1vf ohammeoans in order to mark their en1ohatic 24 Famous Letters of Mahatma Gandhi

1166. disapproval of the utter injustice tc which His Majesty's ministers have become a party if they have not actually been the prime perpetrators of it

1167. Not to be a party to the injustice by ceasing to cooperate wlth the Gov- ernment

1168. Your Excellency must be aware that there was a time when the boldest, though also the most thoughtless among the Mussalmans favoured violence and that Hijrat (emigration) has not yet ceased to be a battle-cry

1169. I confess that I did not-I did not attempt to-succeed in weaning them from violence on moral grounds but purely on utilitarian grounds

1170. t for the time being at any rate has, however, been to stop violence

1171. The school of Hijrat has received a ,check if it has not stopped its activity entirely

1172. I hold that no repression caul~ have prevented a violent eruption if the neople had Ultimdtum to Lord Chelmsford

1173. 25 n~3t ptt:sentcd to th..:m a form of direct action in\ olv .mg considerable sacrifice and ensuing success i such direct action was largely taken up by the public

1174. Non-co-operation was the only dignified and constitutional form of such direct action, for it is the right recognised from times immemorial of the subject to refuse to assist a ruler who misrules

1175. At the same time I admit the non-co-operation practised by the mass of peopl~> is attended with grave risks

1176. But there is yet an escape from non-co-opera- tion

1177. But if you cannot see your way to do so, non-co-operation becames a dire necessity

1178. I hope Your Excellency will give those who have accepteO. my advice and myself the credit for being actuated by 11othing less than a stern sense of duty

1179. I have the honour to remain, Your Excellency's obdt

1180. (Sd.) M. K. GANDHI. Laburnum Road, Gamdevi, Bombay

1181. TO EVERY ENGLISHMAN LlVING IN INDIA. (During the fateful period of the non-co-operation movement of the ':fears 1920 and I9.2I Mahatma Gandhi addressed two soul-stirring letters to the Englishmen residing in India

1182. The coming generations will read these letters wzth immense interest and would bow their heads with reverence to the memory of a great soul-Mahatma Gandhi

1183. In these letters the Mahatma laid bare hzs sm cerest feelings before the Englishmen

1184. He made it plain to every Englishman in India that he had no grudge against in- div&duals

1185. It was the vicious S':JStem of British Imperialism he was fighting and he, in good faith, invited even the Englishmen to join hands with him in the above referred fight agamsc the s:ystem.) JOIN ME IN DESTROYING THIS SYSTEM .

1186. In my humble opinion no Indian has co-operated with the British Government more than I have for an un- broken period of twenty-nine years of public life in the face of circumstances that might well have turned any other man into a rebel

1187. I ask you to believe me when I tell you that my co-operation was not based on the fear of the punishments provided by your laws or any other selfish motives

1188. in fulfilment of my promise to Lotd Chelmsfotd at the War Conference in Delhi, I threw myself in such an active recruitmg campaign in Kaira District involving long and trying marches that I had an attack of dysentery which proved almost fatal

1189. 1 did all this i11 the full belie that acts such as mille must gain for my country an equal status in the Empire

1190. So last December I pleaded hard for a trustful co- operation

1191. Lloyd George and its appreciation by you, and ~he condonation of the Punjab atrocities have completely shattered my faith m the good intentions of the Governme11t and the nation which is supporting it

1192. But though my faith in your good intentions 18 gone I recogmse your bravery and I know that: what you will not yteld to justice and reason, you will gladly y1eld to bravery

1193. Exploitation of India's resources for the benefit o Great Britain

1194. An ever~increasing mihtaty expenditure and a Ci~il Service, the most ex:pensive in the world

1195. 29 Extravagant working of every department in utter disregard of India's poverty

1196. Disarmament and consequent emasculation of a whole nation, lest an armed nation might imperil the lives of a handful of you in our midst

1197. Progressively representative legislation in order to suppress an ever-growing agitation, seeking to give expression to a nation's agony

1198. Degrading treatmE"nt of Indians residing in your Dominions

1199. You know that we are powerless to do tl1at, for you have E"nsured our incapacity to fight in open and honourable battle

1200. Bravery on the battle-field is thus impossible for us

1201. Non-co-operation means 30 Fomous Letters of Mahatma Gar,dhi

1202. nothing less than training in self~sacrifice

1203. Why should we co-operate with you when we know that, by your administration of this great country we are bein

1204. and for that matter the Ali Brothers too, from your consideration

1205. My personality will fail to evoke any response to anti-Muslim cry if I were foolish enough to raise it, as the mag1c name of the Ali Brothers would fail to inspire the Mussalmans with enthusiasm if they were madly to raise an anti-Hindu cry

1206. People flock in their thousands to listen to us, because we

1207. The Ali Brother were your friends as I \vas, and still am

1208. My religion forbids me to bear any ill-will towards you

1209. The Ali Brothers \viU certainly draw the sword if they couldt in defence of their religion and their country

1210. But they and I have made common cause with the ~ople of India in their attempt to voice their feelings and to find a remedy for their distress

1211. You are in search of a remedy to suppress this risint "ebullition of national feelln.l!

1212. 31 suggest to you that the only way to suppress it is to remove the causes

1213. You can compel the Viceroy to retire in favour of a better one ; you can revise your ideas about Sir Michael O'Dwyer and General Dyer

1214. But this you cannot do w1less you consider every Indian to be in reality your equal and brother

1215. I merely point out to you, as a friend, an honourable solution of a grave problem

1216. The other solution, namely repression, is open to you

1217. The Government has already impri- soned two brave men of Panipat for holding and expressmg their opinions freely

1218. One In the Oudh District is-already imprisoned

1219. Propaganda is  being 32 Famous Letters of Mahatma Gandhi

1220. I InVIte you respectfully to choose the better way and make common cause with the people o India whose sslt you are eating

1221. To seek to thwart their a~p1ratinns is disloyalty to the countr)'

1222. M.K. GANDHI. TO EVERY ENGLISHMAN LIVINC IN INDIA. SECOND LETTER. j You are as much slaves-as we.' Deat friend, This is the second time I venture to address you

1223. I know that most of you detest non-co-opera- tion

1224. Some of my Indian friends charge me 'Yith camouflage when I say we need not hate English- men whilst we may hate the system they havt established

1225. Jesus denounced the wickedness ,of the Scribes and the Pharisees, but he did not hate them

1226. Ht1 did not enunciate this law of love for the n1an and hate for the evil in him for himself only, but h~ taught the doctrine for universal practice

1227. Indeed I find it it1 all the scriptures of the world

1228. I have discovered that man is superior to the system he 34 Famous Letters of Mahatma Gandhi

1229. Each one of my country men in Amritsar on that fateful lOth of April was better than the crowd of which he was a member

1230. He as a man would r.ave declined to kill those innocent English bank managers

1231. But in that crowd, many a man forgot himself

1232. Hence it is that an Rnglishman in office is different from an English man outside

1233. It is possible therefore for me to con- demn the system in the strongest terms without considering you to be bad and without imputing bad motives to every Englishman

1234. I want you there- fore to reciptocate and not impute to me motives whxch you cannot read in the written word

1235. Our corporate lie is bas- cl on mUtual disttu.st and fear

1236. This you \Vill admit, i"~ To every Englishman living in India

1237. A S} seem that is responsible for such a state of things is necessarily satanic

1238. One thousand Indian lives against one English life is a doctrine of dark despair and yet believe me, it was enunciated in l919 by the highest of you in the land

1239. self-sacrificing and self-restrained enough for that consummation

1240. But I do ask you to help us in the boycott of foreign cloth and in the anti-drink campaign

1241. The Lancashire cloth, as English historians have shown

1242. was forced upon India and her own world-famed manufactures \Vere deliberately and systematically ruined

1243. India is therefore at the mercy not only o Lancashire but also of Japan

1244. We send out of India every year sixty crores (more or less) of rupees for cloth

1245. Is it not madness to send cotton outside India and have it manufactured i~to cloth there and shipped to us

1246.  36 Fa1tl ous Letters of Mahatma Gandhi

1247. Our women spun fine yarn in their own cottages and supplemented the ea.rnings <.'lf their husbands

1248. Half the race of artistic weavers has died out, and the other half is weaving imported foreign yarn fot want of finer handspun yarn

1249. You will perhaps now understand what boyc.:>tt of foreign cloth means to India

1250. If the Government were today to redress the Khilafat and the Pu.njab wrongs and consent to India attaining immediate Swaraj the boycott movement must: still continue

1251. Swaraj means at least the power to conserve Indian industries tha.t are vital to the economic existence of the nation and to prohibit such imports as may interfer, with such existence.

1252. Agri91lture and hand-spinning are the two lungs of the national body

1253. To ever"} Bnglishma11 Living in India

1254. 37 This matter does not admit of any waiting

1255. The interests of the foreign manufacturers and the Indian importers cannot be considered when the whole nation is starving for want of a large productive occupation ancillary t:O agriculture

1256. you w ll1 not nustp.ke this for a moven1ent of gcacLal boycoct of fore1gn goods

1257. Things other than doth wh1ch can be better made outside Ind1a, she must gracefully receive upon terms ad vamageous to the contracting parties

1258. I am certainly hoping that before bng it would be possible for India to co-operate with England on equal terms

1259. Then will be the titne for exam1ning trade relations

1260. But 1 would like  you to speak out your mind clearly on the .question.

1261. 38 Famous Letters of Mahatma Gandhi

1262. Under every system of Government, total prolubi- tmn so far as I can see will be ms1sted upon by the nation

1263. You can assist the growth of the ever-rising agitation by throwing in the

1264. I am, Y out faithful friend, M.K.GANDHI. TO THE YOUNGMEN OF BENGAL. When the Non-co-operation Movement of the years 19201 1921 was in full swing, India needed the services of her youngmen more than ever before

1265. Congress leaders and Ali Brothers made a joint appeal to the students to leave their studies and to jom the volunteer corps m the1r thousands

1266. In other parts of Indza too stu dents joined the Non~co-operation Movement m large numbers

1267. The following appeal was addressed by Mahatma Gandhi to the youngmen of Bengal in January 192!

1268. -:1:0 Famous Letters of Mahatma Gandh1 The Message of Self~saerifice, Courage and Hope

1269. Dear Young Friend-, I have just read an account of your response to the Nation's call

1270. It has a greater heart, it has more than its share of the spiritual heritage for which our country is specially noted

1271. You have more imagination, more faith and more emotion chan the rest of India

1272. There is, therefore, no reason why Bengal should not lead now as it had done before now

1273. You have taken the step, you will not recede

1274. You have paused, you have considered

1275. You held the Congress that delivered to the Nation the message of Non-Co- operation, i.e., of sel-puttfication, self-sacrifice, cour- age and hope

1276. The Nagpur Congress ratified, clarified and amplified the first declaration

1277. It was re-delivered in the midst of strife, doubt, and disunion

1278. It was 1edelivered in the midst of joy, acclamation, and praftically perfect unanimity

1279. It was open to you to refuse, or to hesitate, or to respcnd

1280. You have chosen the better, thouith .from To the Youngmen of Bengal

1281. 41 a wordly w1se standpoint less cautious way

1282. But for the evil spell that the existing system of Government and, most of all, this Western education has cast upon us, the question will not be considered as open to argument

1283. Can the brave Arabs 1etain their independence and yet be schooled under the aegis of those who would hold them under bondage

1284. Is the case different, or if it is different, is it not stronger in our case when we arc called upon to give up schools conducted under the aegis of a Government, which, rightly or wrongly, we ween to bend to our will or destroy

1285. Brave.cy of the sword they know

1286. Tliey are unconquerable in the art of meetint and 42 Famous Letters of Mahatma Gandhi

1287. We propose, therefote, to stertlize their power of inflicting violence by our non-violence

1288. Non-violence is the cornet stone of the edifice of Non-co-operation

1289. You will, thetefore, not be hasty or ovet-zealous in yout dealings w1th those who may not see eye to eye with you

1290. Intoletance is a species of violence and there- fore against our creed

1291. Non-v10lent Non-co-opeta- tion 1s an object lesson m democtacy

1292. The moment we are able to ensure non-violence, even under circumstances the most provoking that moment we have achieved our end, because that is the mou1ent \Vhen we can offer complete Non-co-operation

1293. Nou-co-operatton deals first with those sens1t1ve classes upon whom the Government has acted so ~uccessfully and who have been lured into the trap consciOusly or unconsciously as the school going youths have been

1294. When we come to think about it, the sacnfice required is infinitesimal for individuals because the whole is distributed among so many of us

1295. To suspend your library studies or one year

1296. If I could infect the whole of the student world with tny :faith, I know that suspension of studies need not extend even to a vear

1297. 43 And in the place of your suspended studies, I would urge you to study the methods of bringing about SwataJ as qutetly as possible even within the year of grace

1298. I ptesent you with the SPINNING WHEEL and suggest to you that on tt depends India's econonuc salvation

1299. But you ate at hbcrty to teject it if you w1sh and go to the college that has been promised to you by Mr

1300. Most of your fellow students in the Nattonal College at Gu]rat have undertaken to giv~ at least four hours to spmning every day

1301. It is no sacnfice to learn a beaut1ful art and to be able to clothe the naked at the same tune

1302. You have done your duty by withdrawing rom Government Colleges

1303. I have only showed you th.e easiest and the most profitable way of devotmg the time at your dxsposal

1304. I fear that the information given to your Royal Highness must have been in its na~re one-sided

1305. I owe it to you, to my friends and myself that I should place before you what I conceive to be the scope of Non-co-operation as followed not only by me but my closest associates such as Messrs

1306. For me it is no joy and pleasure to be actively associated in the poycott of Your Royal Highness, visit

1307. I have tendered loyal, voluntary assistance to Government for an unbroken period of nearly 30 years in the ful

1308. It was therefore no sllght thing, for me to su.e"stest to my countrymen 46 Famous Letters of Mahatma Gandhi

1309. We are not at war with individual English- men

1310. We do not desire to destroy the system that has emasculated our country in body, mind and soul

1311. We are deter- mined to battle with all our might against that in English nature which has made O'J?wyerism and Dyersim possible in the Punjab and has resulted in a wanton affront upon Islam, a faith professed by seven crores of your country men

1312. We consider it inconsistent with our self respect any longer to brook the spirit of superiority and dominance, which has systematically ignored and disregarded the senti- ments of thirty crores of innocent people of India on many a vital matter

1313. therefore, be under subjection to them

1314.  To His Royal Highness the Duke of Connaugltt

1315. Your Royal Highness has come, not to end the system I described, but to sustain it by upholding its prestige

1316. I have the privilege of know- ing him

1317. I believe him to be an honest, amiable gentleman, who will not willingly hurt even a fly, but he certainly failed as a ruler

1318. He allowed him- self to be guided by those whose interest it was to support their power

1319. He is not reading the mind of the Dravidian p1ovince

1320. Here in Bengal you a1e issuing a certificate of merit to a Governor who is again, from all I have heard, an estimable gentleman but he knows nothing of the heart of Bengal and its yearnings

1321. Fort William and the palaces of Calcutta represent an insolent exploita- tion of the unmurmuring and highly cultured peasantry of this fair province

1322. The Non-co~operationists ha,e come to the conclusion that they must not be decievcd by the reforms that tinker with the problem of India's distress and humiliation, nor must they be impatient and angry

1323. We must not in our impatient anger reso.rt to stupid viole11ce

1324. It is not so much British guns that are res- ponsible for our subjectio~ as our voluntary co-operation

1325. 48 Famous Letters of Mahatma Gandhi

1326. Our non-participation in a hearty welcome to Your Royal Highness is thus in no sense a demonst- ration against your high personage, but it is against the system you come to uphold

1327. I know individual Englishmen cannot, even if they will, alter the English nature all o a sudden

1328. If we would be the equals, of Englishmen, we must cast off fear

1329. eliant and independent of schools, coutts, protection and patronage of a Government we ween to end if it will not mend

1330. Hence this Non-violent Non-co-operation

1331. I know we have not all yet become non-violent in speech and deed, but the results so far achieved have, I assure Your Royal Highness been amazing

1332. The people have understood the secret and value of non-violence as they have never done before

1333. He who wiii may see that this is a religtous, purifying movement

1334. We are trying to throw off foreign tinsel splendour and, by reverting to the spinning wheel, reviving the ancient and poetic simplicity of life

1335. I ask Your Roy~l Highness as an Englishman to study tbis movement and its possibilities for the Em.pire and the world

1336. We are at war with nothinJ:l To His Royal Highness, Duke of Connaught

1337. In protecting Islam in the manner we are, we are protecting all religions ; in pro- tecting the honour of India, we are protecting the honour of humanity, for our means are hurtful to none

1338. We des1te to live on terms o friendship of equals both in theory and in practice, and we must con- tjnue to non-co-operate, z.e., to punfy ourselves till the goal is achieved

1339. I ask Your Royal Highness and through you every Englishman, to appreciate the view-point of Non-co-operation

1340. This letter was as a matte1 of fact a kind of ultimatum to the Viceroy asking him to restore the elementary rights of civic life to th

1341. The Mahatma's counsel of wisdom, however

1342. Follouring was the Mahatma's letter

1343. MAKE DECLARATION WITHIN SEVEN DAYS. To His Excellency the Viceroy, Delhi

1344. Sir, Bardoli is a small Tehsil in the Surat district in the Bam bay Presidency, having a population of about 87,000 all told

1345. On the 29th ultimo, it decided under the pre" sidency of Mr

1346. Vithalbhai Patel to embark on mass Civil Disobedience, having proved its fitness for it in terms of the resolution of the All-India Congress Committee which met at Delhi during the first week of November last

1347. But as I am perhaps chiefly res" ponsible for Bardoli's decision, I owe it to Your Excellency and the Public to expl~: in the situ.ation under which the decision has been taken

1348. It was intended under the resolution of the All-India Congress Committ

1349. Then followed the unfortunate and regrettable riots on the 17th November last in Bombay resulting in the postponement of the step contemplated by "Ri.trn oli

1350.  52 Famous Letters of Mahatma Gandhi

1351. Meantime repression of a virulent type has taken place with the concurrence of the Government of India in Bengal, Assam, the United Provinces, the Punjab, the province of Delhi and in a way in Bihar and Orissa anc.I elsewhere

1352. I know that you have objected to the usc of the word " repression " for describing the action of the autilorities in these pro- vinces

1353. In my opinion~ when an action is taken which is in excess of the requtrements of the situa~ tion it is undoubtedly repression

1354. The looting of property, assaults on innocent people, brutal treat- ment of the piisoners in jails, including flogging can in no sense be desclibed as legal, civilised or in any way necessary

1355. 53 of us, as an illegal use of the ordinary law nor again can the administrative interference with the liberty of the Press under a law that is under promise of repeal be regarded as anything but repression

1356. The immediate task before the country there- fmc is to rescue from paralysis freedom of .speech, freedom of association and freedom of Press

1357. But as I was anxious to avoid all avoidable suffering, I had no hesitation in advising the Working Committee of the Congress to accept the recommendations of that Conference

1358. Although, in my opinion, the terms were quite in keeping with your own requirments, as I Ulldcr- stood them through your Calcutta speech and other- wise, you have summarily rejected the proposal

1359. In the circumstances, tnere is nothing before .the country but to adopt some non ..

1360. violent method for the enforcement of its de S ~ dsr including het 54 Famous Letters of Mahatma Gandhi elementary rights of free speech, free association, and free Press

1361. But the lawless repression {in a way unparalleled in the history of this un- fortunate country) has made immediate adoption of mass Civil Disobedience an imperative duty ...

1362. 55 they be regardmg the redress of the Khilafat or the Punjab wrongs, or Swaraj or any other purpose and even though they fall ~lithin the repressive sections of the Penal Code or the Criminal Procedure Code m other 1epressivc laws subject always to the cnndidon of non-violence

1363. I would further urge you to free the Press from all administrative control and xcstor~ all the fines and forfeitures !'ecently imposed

1364. [n thus utging I am askmg Your Excellency to do what is today being done m every country which is deemed to be under civihzed Government

1365. Aggressive Civil Disobe- dience in that case will be taken up only when the Government departs from its policy of strictest neutrality or refuses to yield to the clearly expressed opimon of the vast majority o the people of India

1366. a letter-agam of the nature of an appeal and an ultimatum, combined in cme-to Lord Irwin, the Viceroy of India at that time

1367. Gandhiji wrote two letters to Lord lnvin,-one at the time of launching the Civil Disobedience Campaign and the other sometime bel ore his arrest.) The first letter ; WHY I REGARD THE BRITISH RULE AS A CURSE

1368. on Civ i1 Disobedience and taking the risk I have dreaded to take all these years, I would fain approach you and find a w1y out

1369. I cannot intentionally hurt any thing that lives, much less fellow-human beings even though they may do the greatest wrong to me and mine

1370. Whilst therefore l hold British rule to be a curse, I do not intend to harm a single Englishman or any legitimate interest he maj' have in India

1371. Though I bold the British rule in India to be a curse, I do not therefore consider Englishmen in general to be worse than any other people on earth

1372. Indeed much that I have learnt of the evil of Bdtish rule is due to the writings of frank and courageous Englishmen who have not hesitated to tdl the unpalatable truth aboutthat rule

1373. It has sapped the foundations of our culture, and, by the policy of disarmament, it has degraded us spiritually

1374. Lacking inward strength, we have been reduced by all but universal disarmament to a state bordering on cowardly helplessness

1375. In common with many of my countrymen, I had hugged the fond hope that the proposed Round Table Conference might furnish a solution

1376. Needless to say there never was any question of Parliament's verdict being anticipated

1377. Instances are not wanting of the British Cabinet, in anticipation of Parliamentary verdict, having pledged itself to a particula:t; policy

1378. The Delhi interview having miscarried, there was no option for Pandit Motilal Nehru and me Letters to Lord Irwin

1379. 59 but to take steps to carry out the solemn resolution of the Congress arrived at in Calcutta at its Session of 1928

1380. But the resolution o Independence should Cduse no alatm if the word "Dominion Status", mentioned in your announcement, has been used 111 tts accepted sense

1381. For, has it not been admitted by responsible British statesmen that Dominion Status is virtual Independence

1382. What however, I fear, ts that there never has been any intention of granting such Dominion Status to India in the inmediate fut

1383. Since the an- nouncement many events have happened which show unmistakably the trend of British policy

1384. If nothing is done to end the process of exploitation, India must be bled with an evet increasing speed

1385. The Finance Member regards' as a settled fact the ls

1386. ratio which, by a stroke of the pen, ilrains I~dia of a fe\v crores

1387. And when a serious attempt 60 Famous Letters of Mahatma Gandhi

1388. is being made through a civil form of direct action to unsettle this fact among many others, even you cannot help appealing to the wealthy landed classes to help you to crush that attempt in the name of an order that grinds India to atoms

1389. It 1s for that reason that I have been recently telling th~ public what independence should really mean

1390. The terrific pressure of land revenue which furnishes a large part of the total revenue, must  undergo considerable modification in Independent .I11dia

1391. Even the much vaunted permanent settle-

1392. n:t,ent benefits a few rich Zamindars not the ryots 

1393. The r,at has remained as helpless as ever

1394. Not only then has land revenue to be considerably :teduced, but the whole revem.te system has to be so revised as to make the ryot's _good its primary concern

1395.  EYen the salt he :tnust use to live is so t .

1396. 61 as to make the burden fall heaviest on him if only because of the heartless impartiality of its incidence

1397. The tax shows itself still more burdensome on tl1e poor man when it is remembered that salt 1s the one thing he must eat more than the rich man both mdividually and collectively

1398. It is defended under the false pleas of individual freedom, but in reality it is maintained for its ow11 salte

1399. The ingenuity of the authors of the Reforms of 1919 transferred this revenue to the so-called responsible part of dyarchy so as to throw the burden of prohibition on it, thus from the beginnmg rendenng It powerless for good

1400. If the unhappy Minister wipes out this revenue, he must starve education, since in the existing circumstances he has no new source of replacing that revenue

1401. If the weight ot taxation has crushed the poor from above, the destruction of the central supplementary industry, i.e., hand-spinning, has undermined t

1402. The tale of India's ruination is not conlplete without a reference to the lia'Qilities incurred in her name

1403. It must be the duty of a free 62  Famous Letters of Mahatma Gandhi

1404. India to subject all liabilities to the strictest investi- gation and repudiate those that may be adjudged by an impartial tribunal to be unjust and unfair

1405. The iniquities sampled above are maintained in order to carry on a foreign administration, demonst1ably the most expensive in the world

1406. 21,000 per month besides many other indirect additions

1407. The British Prime Minister gets 5,000 per year, i.e., over Rs

1408. 5,400 per month at the present rate of exchange

1409. 700 per day against India's average income of less than annas 2 per day

1410. 180 per day against Great Britain's ave:rage income of nearly Rs

1411. Thus you are getting much over 5,000 times India's average income

1412. The British Prime Minister is getting only 90 times Britain's average income

1413. I have too great a regard for you as a n1an to wish to hurt your feelings

1414. But a system that provides for such an arrangement deserves to be sumn1arily scrapped

1415. Jlhat is true of the Viceregal salaty is true generally of the whole administra- tion

1416. 63 A radical cutting down o the revenue, therefore, depends upon an equally radical reduction in expenses of administration

1417. Hence, in my opinion, the spontaneous demonstration of 26th January, in which hundreds of thousands of villagers instinctively participated

1418. Not one of the great British political parties, it seems to me, is prepared to give up the Indian spoils to which Great Britain helps herself from day to clay, often in spite of the unanimous opposition of Indian opmxon

1419. Nevertheless if India is to live as a nation, if the slow death by starvation of her people is to stop, some remedy must be found for immediate relief

1420. India tnust con- sequently evolve force enough to free herself from that embrace of death

1421. It is common cause that, however disorJtanised and for the time, being 64 Famous Letters of Mahatma Gandhi

1422. insignificant it may be, the party of violence 1s gaining ground and making itself felt

1423. And the conviction is growing deeper and deepe1 in me that nothing but unadulterated non-violence can check the organised violence ot the British Govern- ment

1424. Many think that non-violence is not an active force

1425. To s1t still would be to give rein to both the forces above mentioned

1426. Having unquestioning and immovable faith in the efficacy of non .

1427. violence as I know it, 1t would be sinful on my part to wait any longet

1428. This non-violence will be expressed through civil disobe- dience for the moment confined to the inmates of the Satyagraha Ashram, but ultimately designed to cover all those who choose to join the movement with its obvious limitations

1429. I know that in embarking on non-violence, I shall be running what might fairly be termed a mad :risk:, but the -victories of truth have never been won without risks, often of the gravest character

1430. version of a nation that has consciously or uncon Letters to Lord Irwin

1431. 65 sciously preyed upon another far more numerous, far more ancient and no less cultured than itself 1s worth any amount of risk

1432. I have deliberately used the w01d conver~wn

1433. for my ambition is no less than to convett the British people through non-violence and tlm:, make them see the wrong they have done to India

1434. I served them upt:o 1919 blindly

1435. But when my eyes were opened, :1nd I ' concieved non-co-operation the object still was t.:> serve them

1436. If I have equal love for your people with mine, it will not long remain hidden

1437. If people join me as I expect they will, the sufferings they will un- dergo, unless the British nation sooner retraces Its steps, will be enough to melt the stoniest hearts

1438. 66 Famous Letters of Mahatma Gandhi

1439. If we want to sever the British connection, it is because of such evils

1440. If the British commerce with India is purified of greed, you will have no difficulty in recognising our independence

1441. Impor- tant though they undoubtedly ate for the considera- tion of any scheme o governm

1442. ent, they have little bearing on the greater problems which are above communities and which affect them all equally

1443. But if :~ou cannot see -your way to deal with these evils t.tnd m:Y letter makes no appeal to your heart, on the 1 rth da:~ of this month I shall proceed with such co--wtJrkers of the Ashram as I can take to disregard the pro~isian.s of Salt laws

1444. I regard this tax to be the most iniquitous of all from the poor man's stand- point

1445. As the Independence Movement is essen- tially for the poorest in the land, the beginning will be made with this evil

1446. The wonder...ia that we Letters to Lord Irwin

1447. 67 have submitted to the cruel monopoly for so long

1448. It is, I know, open to you to frustrate my design by an-esting me

1449. and in the act of disobeying the Salt Act lay themselves open to the penalties of a law that should never have disfigured the Statute-book

1450. This letter is not in any way intended as a threat, but is a simple and sacred duty peremptory on a civil resister

1451. Therefore I am aving it specially delivered by a young Engllsh friend, who believes in the Indian cause and is a full believer in non-violence and whom

1452. Providence seems to have sent to me as it were for the v_~Y purpose

1453. I remain, Your Sincere friend, M. J(, GANDHI. THE SECOND LETTER. The following is the text of Gandhiji's second letter to Lord Irwin drafted on the eve of his arrest : Dear Friend, I mud Commence the March God willing, it is my intention .

1454. to set out for Dharsana and reach there with my companions ,   .

1455. It is effective- ly under Government control as the Viceroy's house

1456. 69 It is not without hesitation that the step has been decided upon

1457. I had hoped that the Govern- ment would fight che civil resisters in a civilised manner

1458. I couJd !1:1\ e had nothing to say if, in dealing wit!1 the ci"il tcsisters, the Government had satisfied itself with ilpplying the ordinaty processes of law

1459. e known leaders have 1:-een dealt with more or less according to the legal formality, the rank and file has been often savagely and in some cases even indec2ntly assaulted

1460. Had these been isolated cases, they might bave been overlooked

1461. But accounts have come to me from Bengal, Behar Utkal, U. P. Delhi and Bombay confirming the experiences of Gujrat of which I have ample evidence at my disposal

1462. In Karachi, Peshawar and Madras the firing would appear to have been unprovoked and unnecess.ary

1463. Bones have been broken, private parts have been squeezed for the purpose a making volunteers give up, to the Government valueless, to the volunteers precious, salt

1464. The crowd demandmg restoration ot the .Flag thus illegally seized is reported to have been mercilessly beaten back

1465. That the Flag was subse- quently restored bet1ayed a guilty conscience

1466. In Btmi!al there seem to have been only a few prosec-70 Famous Letters of Mahatma Gandhi

1467. cutions and assaults about salt, but unthinkable cruelties are said to have been practised in the act of snatching flags from volunteers

1468. to have been burnt, eatables forciby taken

1469. A vegetable market in Gujcrat has been l'aided, because the dealers would not 5ell vegetables to officials

1470. These acts have taken place in front (lf crowds who, for the sake of Congress mandate, hav c submitted without rEtaliation

1471. I ask you to belie,e the accounts given by men pledged to truth

1472. Repudiation even by high officials has, as in the Bardoli case, often proved false

1473. The officials I regret to have to say, have not hesitated to publish false- hoods to the people even during the last five weeks

1474. I take the following samples from Government notices issued from Collector's offices m Guje1at :- 1

1475. Adults use five pounds of salt per year, therefore pay three annas per year as tax

1476. I Government removed the monopoly, people will have to pay higher prices and in addition make good to the Government the loss sustamed by the removal of the monopoly

1477. The salt youtake from the sea-shore is not eatable, therefore the Government destroys tt

1478. Gandhi says that Gove1nment has destroyed hand spinning in this country, whereas everybody knows that this 1:, not true, because throughout the country there is not a village where hand- spinning of cotton is not going ou

1479. Moreover in every province cotton spinners are shown superior methodf-t and are provided with better instruments at less prices and are thus helped by Government

1480. Out of every five 1upees of the debt that the Government has incurred, rupee~ four have been beneficially spent

1481. I have taken these three sets of statement~ from three different leaflets

1482. The daily consumption of salt by an adult xs three times the amount stated and therefore the poll tax and the salt tax undoubtedly is at least 9 as

1483. And this tax is levied from n1an, woman,

1484. It 1s a wicked falsehood to say that every village has a spinning wheel and that the spinnin-'l 72 Famous Letters of Mahatma Gandhz

1485. mov~.:ment is in any shape or form encouraged or supported by the Government

1486. Financiers can bett~r dispose of the falsehood that four out of every five rupees of the public debt is used for the benefit of th.= public

1487. But those falsehoods are mere sampl~s of what people know is going on in every day contact with the Govermuent

1488. Only the other day a Gujl!rati poet, a brave man, was convicted on prejudg- ~d official evidence in spite of his emphatic statement that at the time mentioned he was sleeping soundly in anvther place

1489. Liquor dealers have assaulted picket:s admitted by officials to have been peaceful and sold liquor in contravention of regulations

1490. As to the assault though they are known to every body, they may take shelter under the plea that they have received no complaints

1491. You have found a short cut through the law's delay in the matter of the trial of Bhagat Singh and others by doing a way with the ordinary procedure

1492. Is it any wonder if I call all these o:ffi.clai activities and inactivities " VP.ilPd form ~f Letters to Lord Irwin

1493. Before then the reign of terrorism that has jusf begun overwhelms India, I feel that I must take a bolder step and if possible divert your wrath in a cleaner if more drastic channel

1494. According to the science of Satyagraha, tli~' greater the repression and law Iessness on the pari:' M authority, the greater should be the suffering couttitt by the victims

1495. Success is the ceTtt.dn result o'f suffering of the extremest  ,ha.racter t.~oluntar~ uJlderttone: 74 Famous Letters of Mahatma Gandhi

1496. I say what I mean and think- And I have been saying for the last fifteen years m India, and outside for twenty years more, and repeat now that the only way to conquer violence ls through noL1violencc pure and undefiled

1497. I have said also that every violent act, word and even thought interferes with the progress of non-vtolent act

1498. If in spite of such repeated warnings, people will resort to violence, I must down responsibihty save such as inevitably attaches to every human being for the acts of every other human being

1499. question of responsibility apart, I dare not postpone action on any cause whatsoever if non- violence is the force the seers of the world have claimed it to be and if I am not to belie my own extensive experience of its working

1500. I would therefore ask you to remove the tax which many of your illustrious countrymen have condemn- ed

1501. in unmeasured terms and which, as you could not have failed to observe, has evoked universal protest and rese-ntment expressed in civil disobedience

1502. 75 If you say, as you have said, that the civil disobe- dience must end in violence, history will pronounce the verdict that the Bntish Government not bearing because not understanding non-violence, goaded human nature to violence, which 1t could understand and deal with

1503. But in spite of the goading, I shall hope that God will g1ve the people of India wtsdom and strength to Withstand every temptation and provocation to violence

1504. therefore, you cannot see your way to remove the Salt Tax and remove the prohibitions on pnvate salt-making I must reluctantly commenc~ the march adumberated m the opening paragraph of my letter

1505. In the "jear I930 when he was m Yervada Jail the inmates of Yer<~ada )ait received ver'J affectionate letters from him, somt

1506. of which are reproduced below :) 1-TO MIRA BAl

1507. I have been quite happy and have been mak- ing up for arrears of rest

1508. The nights here are cool and, as I am permitted to sleep at night under the sky, I have refreshing sleep

1509. About the change made in the manner of taking the diet, you will learn from my general letter

1510. It was a great treat to rece1ve the wheel so thoughtfully sent and with things so carefully pack~ ed in it

1511. The carding bow, the supermtendent tells me, was lost on the way by the friends who brought it 

1512. I am m no hurry fo1 it as you have sent me a liberal quantity of slivers

1513. They were not the ones I wanted-however this mistake does not matter much as I do not miss the books just now

1514. For the first day I gave nearly seven hours to nearly reach 160 rounds

1515. I was washed out at the end of the per- formance

1516. refore, in no hurry to the books- The prison officials are all kind and attentive, Love BAPU.  It has since been found by the friends and posted co the Jail

1517.  II-GENERAL LETTER TO ALL THE INMATES OF THE ASHRAM. u My health is alright

1518. I rise in the morning at the Ashram hour (4 A.M.) I am given a light, so I can read the Gita chapters according to our custom

1519. I rest regularly at 8 in the morning, and 12 noon, and thus get some two to three hours sleep during the day

1520. I gave up oranges during my march, but have begun to take them again here

1521. On the first day I took raw goat's milk and am continuing it for the present

1522. In the mornings, also, I take cold water instead of hot

1523. They give me full facilities for making it hot, but if the body can be maintained on cold water, why bother about hot water

1524. I had begun taking cold water baths, but from yesterday I am again bathing with hot water

1525. The goat is milked in my presence, so there is no question as to the cleanliness of the :Dlilk

1526. If raw milk proves unsatisfactory I will, o course~ ~et it heated

1527. 79 They have given me a man to clean vessels, etc., Dat~s and raisins I am taking

1528. There 1s no reason to be anxious about my diet

1529. There is, and ought to be, no tune in these days for taking superfluous care o others

1530. As for my spinning, 1t is regular

1531. In Wardha, some people have reached the speed of 80 rounds in half an hour

1532. ---Ill-TO "BA" (KASTURBA GANDHI) How nice it was that I saw you and all the ~i$ters the evening previous to my arrest

1533. And I ~{ls able to go with you up to your residence which ga'\re tne much pleasure~ God's favours pour down upon us as rains from Heaven ..

1534. All the verses of the sisters' prayer were thoughtfully artanged

1535.  To his son De"adas, he wrote : I do not know where you are

1536. But there is God above to take care of us, so let us not worry about one another

1537. IV-TO LAK.SHMI (THE LITTLE UNTOUCH ABLE ADOPTED DAUGHTER OF GANDHIJI) AND OTHER LITTLE CHILDREN. Little Birds, Ordinary birds cannot fly without wings

1538. With wings of course, all can fly

1539. But if you, without wings will learn how to fly, then all your troubles will indeed be at an end

1540. See, I have no wings, yet I come flying to you every day in thought

1541. Look, here is little Vimala, here is Hari and here Dharmakumar

1542. There is no need of a teacher for those who know how to think, the teacher may guide us, but he cannot give us the power of thinking

1543. Tell me who, amongst you, are not praying properly in Prabhubhai's evening prayer

1544. Send me a letter signed by all, and those who do not know bow to sign may make a cross

1545. Yerawada Palace, BAPU'S blessings

1546. CORRESPONDENCE WITH LORD WILLINGDON. GANDHIJI'S 1ST REJOINDER. In the "jear 1931 when the relations between the Congress and the British Government were straitened to a rather 'dangerous' extent, a queer situation arose

1547. Gandhiji was scheduled to see the Viceroy- Lord Willingdon to discuss with him the politicaL situation of the country with a view to arrive at some solution of the impasse

1548. Parallel to the extension of invitation to Gandhiji, the Viceroy started a campaign of shooting in the Frontiera.ndarrestsinother parts of India

1549. Gandhiji sent a wire to the Viceroy asking whether' friendly relations between u.s are close or whether you expect me to see you'

1550. His Excellency sent a reply that he was willing to see him but he was not prepared to discuss anything with regard to any of the ' repressive measures'

1551. He also held Ga1tdhiji responsible [OT various measures of lawlessness

1552. T(,l this Gandhiii issued the following rejoinder on 3uc December 1931

1553. ---IT IS NOT YET TOO LATE. I thank His Excellency for the wire in reply to mine of the 29th instant, It grieves me, for His Excellency has rejected, in a manner hardly befitting his high position, an advance made in the friendliest spirit

1554. I had approached as a seeker wanting light on questions upon which I desire to understand the Government version o every serious and extra- ordinary measures to which I made refexence

1555. In my opinion the constituti~.aal issue dwin- dles into insignificance in the face of the Ordinances 'and Acts which must, if not met with stubborn resistance, end in utter demoralisation of the Nation

1556. I hope no self-respecting Indian will run the risk o killing national spirit for a doubtful contin- gency of securing a constitution to which no Nation with stamina may be left~ Let me also point out that as to the Frontier Province your telegrBUJ. 84 Famows Letters of Mahatma Gandhi

1557. contains a narration of facts which on the face of them furnish no warrant for arrest of popular leaders passing extra-legal Ordinance making life and pro- perty utterly insecure, and shooting unarmed peaceful crowds for daring to demonstrate against the arrests of their trusted leaders

1558. If Khan Saheb Abdul Ghaffar asserted the right to complete independence, it was a natural claim and a claim made with impunity by the Con- gJ;"ess at Lahore in 1929 and by me with energy put before the British Government in London

1559. More- oVer let me remind the Viceroy that despite the knowledge on the Government's part that the Congress mandate contained such a claim, I was invited to attend th

1560. e London Conference as the Con- gress delegate

1561. In refusing to attend ;;r Darbar if Khan Saheb was fomenting racial hatred, it was undoubtedly regrettable

1562. but assum- ing that he did foment racial hatred, he was entitled to an open trial where he could have defended himself against the accusation

1563. 85 Regarding the United Provinces, His Excell- ency is surely misinformed because there was no no-rent campaign authorised by the Congress

1564. But whilst negotiations were proceeding between Govern ..

1565. ment and Congress representatives, the time for collection of rents actually arrived and rents began

1566. Congressmen were therefore obliged to advise tenants to suspend payment peLld- ing the result of negotiations, and Mr

1567. T-he controversy in the United Provinces is of long

1568. standing and involves the well-being of millions of peasantry known to be economically ground down

1569.  R6 Famous Letters of Mahatma Gandhi

1570. I must repudiate the suggestion that the Con gress has the slightest desire to promote disorder in any shape or form

1571. As to Bengal, the Congress is at one with the Government in condemning assassinations and should heartily co-operate with Government in measures that may be found neces- sary to stamp out such climes

1572. I heartily assent to the proposition laid down in your telegram that co-operation must be mutual

1573. But your telegram leads me irresistibly to the conclusion that His Excellency demands co~ operation from the Congress without returning any on behalf of Government

1574. 1 can read in no other way his pre-emptory refusal to discuss these matters, which, as I have endeavoured to show, have at least two sides

1575. The popular side 1 have put as I understand it, but before committinS tnyself to a definite judgment I was anxious to understand

1576. the other, that is, the Govern~ ment side and then tender my advice to the Con-

1577. gress,  With teference to the last paragraph of your Letters to Lord Willingdon

1578. I cannot conceal from His Excellency my opinion that the reply he has condescended to send was hardly a return for my friendly and well-meant approach

1579. Along with my desire and willingness to co- operate with the Goverment, I must place my limi- tations before His Excellency

1580. Non-violence is my absolute creed

1581. I believe that civil disobedience is not only the natural right of a people, especially when they have no effective voice in their own Government, but that it also is an effective substi- tute for violence or armed rebellion

1582. If His Excellency thinks it worthwhile to see me, the operation of the resolution will be suspended pending our discussion in the hope that it may result in the resolution being finally given up

1583. I admit that the correspondence between His Excellency and m:yse1 is of such grave impottallce a$ not to brook delay in publication

1584. J am, thetefore, sending my telegram, YO't.lt reply

1585. this rejoinder and the Workiug Committee's resolution for pUblication

1586. To that telegram the Mahatma issued the following '!ejoinder;-TIME ALONE WILL SHOW WHO WAS JUSTIFIED

1587. May I remind the Governxnent that the Delhi negoti~ ations were opened and carried on whilst civd d1s~ obedience was not given up but only discontinued

1588. Tlus position was reasserted and accepted by His Ettcellency and his Government in Simla in Septem~ be~ last ptior to my departure for London

1589. Although r had made it clear that under certain circumstances the Congress might have to resume Civil Disobedience the Government did not break off negotiation$

1590. That it was made clear by the Government that Civil Disobedience carried with it the penalty for disobedience merely proves what civil resisters bargain for but does not in any way effect my argu- tnent

1591. Had the Government resented that attitude, it was open to them not to send me to London

1592. On the contrary my departure had His Excellency's blessings

1593. 91 Government should be dependent on my judgment

1594. I claim that my messages have no othet meaning

1595. Meanwhile I wish to assure the Government that every endeavour will be made on the part of the Congress to carry on the struggle without malice and in a strictly non-violent manner

1596. It was hardly necessary to remind me that the Congress and I, its humble representative, are responsible for all the consequences o our actions

1597. TO THE NATION. In )anutlr'J 193.2 the political situation in India was tense and explosive

1598. The country was bubbling with enthusiasm of unprecedented intensity and people were bent upon casttng away the 'JOke of slaver'J by hook or b, crook

1599. The Congress had alread, passed a resolu- tion int~olving the resumption

1600. of Civil Disobedience Mot1ement and on the other hand, the British Govern ment were bent upon suppressing the upheavals b1 all pos $ible means, and the:Y had alreacl:y apprised the Mahatma of their intentions through a telegram

1601. At that critical period Mahatma Gandhi issued the following message to .the Nation :-WE ARE EMBARKING ON A FIERY ORDEAL. It is a matter for deep regret to me to have received this telegram from H.E. the Viceroy and the Government

1602. heaped error upon error, instead of courageously acknowledging th~ first error, in practically banging the door in my face by imposing for the coveted mterview conditions which no self-respecting man can possibly accept and reopen the door

1603. Surely he mllst know that the negotiations which resulted in the settlement were being carried GA. although civil disobedience was still on, and under the settlement it was never finally given up but was 94 Famous Letters of Mahatma Gandhi

1604. To this I wish to add the Second Settlement that was arrived at in Simla immediately prior to my departure or London

1605. Surely, if civil disobedience was such a heinous crime, the Government could never have exchanged correspondence on that basis and sent me to London with Viceregal blessings; but I see that with the change of times, manners have also changed

1606. 95 urge them not to be angry with the administrators

1607. We have faith in ourselves and therefore in human nature to feel that, if we suffer long enough and in the proper spirit, our sufferings must result m converting administrators

1608. After all, let us realise that the greater and the longer sufferings, the greater would be our iltness for Swarajya, for which we are embarking upon a fiery ordeal

1609. GANDHIJI'S LETTER TO SIR SAMUEL HOARE IN MARCH 1932

1610. In the following letter dated March u, I932 4ddressed to Sir Samuel Hoare, Mahatma Gandhi informed His Majesty's Government that in the event of their creating separate electorates for the Depressed Classes, he (the Mahatma) would fast unto death

1611. In pursuance of that statement, I had hoped on my return to India to mobilize public opinion against separate electotate at any rate for the Depressed Classes

1612. From the newspapers I am permitted to read, I observe that any tnoment His Majesty's Government may declare their dectsion

1613. At first I bad thought that if the decision was found to create separate electorates for the Depressed Classes, I should take such steps as I might then consider necessary to give effect to my vow

1614. But I feel it would be unfair to the British Gavernme11t for me to act without giving previous notice

1615. Naturally they could not attach the sianificance I ~ave to my statement

1616. 98 Famous Letters of Mahatma Gandhi

1617. I need hardly reiterate all the objections I have to the creation of separate electorates for the D~pressed Classes

1618. I am not against their representa- tion in the legislatures

1619. I would favour one ot their adults, male and female, being registered as voters irrespective of education or property qualifica- tions even though the franchise test may be stricter for others

1620. To appreciate the harm that separate electorates would do them, one has to know how they are distributed amongst the so-called Caste Hindus and how dependent they are on the latter

1621. For me the question of these classes is predomi- nently moral and religious

1622. The political aspect, important though it ist dwindles into insigntficance compared to the moral and religious issue

1623. I feel that no penance Caste Hindus mav do, can :in To Sir Samuel Hoare 99 any way compensate for the calculated degradation to which they have consigned the Depressed Classes for centuries

1624. But I know that separate electorate 1s neither penance nor any remedy for the crushing degradation they have groaned under

1625. I therefore respectfully inform His Majesty's Government that

1626. I am painfully conscious of the fact that such a step whilst I am a priso11er, must cause grave embarrassment to His Majesty's Government and that it will be regarded by many as highly improper on the part of one holding my position to introduce

1627. into the political field methods which they would describe as hysterical, if not much worse

1628. AU that I can urge in defence is that, for me, the contem  plated step is not a method, it is a part of my being

1629. It is the call of conscience which I dare not disobey, even though it may cost whatever reputation for sanity I may possess

1630. So far as I can see now, my discharge fcom imprisonment would not make the duty of fasting ~Y the less imperative

1631.  100 Famous Letters of Mahatma Gandhi I am hoping however that all my ears are wholly unjustified and that the British Government have no intention whatever of creating separate electorate for the Depressed Classes

1632. It is perhaps as well for me t<

1633. r~!er to an2~~r matter that is agitating me and which may also -enforce a similar .fast

1634. It is the way repression is g_inl o.n.

1635. {I have no notion when I maY"f;;i;;the shock that would compel the sacrifice

1636. Both English and Indian officials a:re being brutalised

1637. The latter, high and low, are becoming demoralised by reason of the Government regarding as meritorious, disloyalty to the people and inhuman conduct towards their own kith and kin

1638. And all this, as it seems to me being done in ~to crush the spirit of freedom which the Con- It

1639. Repression is not confined to punishiq chril breaches of the col'TJ.rnon t~w

1640. 'tt To Sir Samuel Hoare 101 goads people to break the newly made orders of autocracy designed for the most part to humiliat~ them

1641. In all these doings, as I read them, I see no spirit of democracy

1642. Indeed my recent visit to Eng- land has confirmed my opinion that your democracy is a superficial circumscribed thing

1643. In the weighti- est matters, decisions are taken by individuals or groups without any reference to the Parliament and these have been ratified by Members having but a vague notion of what they were doing

1644. Such wa.s the case with Egypt and the War o 1914 and such is the case with India

1645. one man should have unfettered power of affecti.ng the destiny of an ancient people numbering over three hundred millions and that his decisions can be enforced by mobilising the most terrible forces of destruction

1646. In so far as I am respon- sible an

1647. d can help it, how am I to arrest the process

1648. I regard myself by nature a demo- crat

1649. The democracv of my conception is wholly 102 Famous Letters of Mahatma Gandhi inconsistent with the use of physical force for enforc- ing its will

1650. It is a process of self-suffering and a part of the plan is, that in given circumstances a civil resister must sacrifice himself even by fasting to a finish

1651. There- fore in writing to you about the possibility of a fast regarding the Depressed Classes, I felt I would be untrue to you if I did not tell you also there was another possibility not remote, of such a fast

1652. Needless to say, from my side absolute secrecy has been maintained about all the correspondence I have carried on with you

1653. 0 course, Sardar Vallab bhai Patel and Mr

1654. Mahadev Desai who have just been sent to join us, know all about it

1655. But you will no doubt make whatever use you wish, of this letter

1656. --TO RAMSAY MACDONALD. (Gandhiji's letter dated August r8, r932 from Yerwada ]ail addressed to the then Prime Minister of England Mr

1657. " FAST UNTO DEATH " Dear friend, There can be no doubt that Sir Samuel Hoare has showed you and the Cabinet my letter to him of 11th March on the question of the representation of the Depressed Classes

1658. I have read the British Government's decision on the representation of the Minorities and have slept over it

1659. In pursuance o my letter to Sir Samuel Hoare and my declaration at the meeting of the Minorities Committee of the Round Table Con .

1660. ference on the 13th November 1931, at St

1661. James' Palace I have to resist your decision with my life

1662. {The only way I can do so is hi declaring a mpetual )1st unto death from foo~ of an..x kind, save wat~r with ot without salt and soda

1663. ~of 20t,h September next unless the smd decision is mean,...,

1664. hile 1 cvised in the manner suggested above

1665. I also ask that tJus letter and my letter to Sir Samuel Hoare, already referred to be published, at the earliest possible m

1666. On my part I have scrupulously observed the rule of the jail and have communicated my desire or the contents of the two letters to no one save my two companions, Sardar Vallabhai Patel and Sjt

1667. But I want, if you make it possible public opinion to be affected by my letters

1668. Hence my request for their early  publication

1669. But as a man of religious that I hold myself to be, I have no ather course left open to me

1670. As I have said in my letter to Sir Samuel Hoare, even if His Majesty~s G~ernment decided to release me in order to save themselves embarrassment, my fast will have to con-106 Famous Letters of Mahatma Gandhi

1671. For, I cannot now hope to resist the declSlon by any other means

1672. It may be that my juJgmcnt lS wa1ped and that I am wholly 111 et ror in regarding separate electo1ates for the Deptessed Classes as harmful to them or Hinduism

1673. If so, I am not likely to be in the tight with reference to other parts of my philo sophy of life

1674. In that case, my death by fasting will be at once a penance tor my error and a lifting of a weight from off those numberless men and women who have a child-like faith in my wisdom

1675. Whereas if my judgment is right, as I have little doubt it is, the contemplated step is but a due fulfilment of the scheme of life which I have tried for more than a quarter of a century apparently not without consider- able success

1676. M. A. JINNAH. In the year I93B a serious attempt was made by ---!' the Congress Leaders to come to an understanding with -Mr

1677. ]innah, President of the Muslim League of India i with a view to bring about unity between the twoorganiza~ tions-the League and the Congress-and to solve the Hindu-Muslim tangle

1678. however insisted that an essential precondztion to any agreement between the two organizations was ~he recognition by the Congress that the Muslim League 1.t!~,.Uhe ~k B:v.iliqr.ztg,~ and ,epresentative political orgamzation of the Muslims of lndia

1679. Jinnah: IN YOUR SPEECH I MISS THE OLJD NATIONALIST. Dear Mr

1680. Jinnah, Pandit Nehru told me yesterday that you were complaining to Maulana Sahib about the absence of any reply from me to your letter of the 5th Novem- ber in reply to mine of the 19th October

1681. I :re-read the letter and I still think there was nothing useful that I could have said in reply

1682. Kher told me definitely he had a private message rom you

1683. He delivered it to me when I was alone- I could have sent you a verbal message in reply but in order to give you a true picture of my mental state I sent you a short note

1684. But I did feel, as I still do, that .

1685. 109 " Your complain of my silence

1686. Believe me, the moment I can do something that can bring the two communities together nothing in the world can prevent me from so doing

1687. (You seem to deny tha,!,!2Yt ~ p~~~Jl .

1688. p{  WN, but your later pronouncements too confirmed my first impression

1689. In your speech I miss the old Nationalist -when in 1915 I returned from my self-imposed exile in South Africa

1690. If you say you are, in spite of your speeches, I shall accept your word

1691. This again is not for publication but for your eyes; it is the one of a friend not of aa opponent

1692. In this letter Gandhijt expressed a strong desire for unity between two great countries of the East-India and China

1693. I had always felt drawn towards you in our nght for freedom, and that contact and our conversation brought China and her problems still nearer to me

1694. Long ago, between 1905 nnd 1913 when I was m South Africa, I was in constant touch with the small Chinese colony m Johanssesburg I knew them :first as clients and then as comrades in the Indian passive resistance struggle m South Africa

1695. I learnt then to admire their thrift, industry, resourcefulness and internal umty

1696. I have thus felt greatly attracted towards your great country and, in comtnon with my countrymen, our sympathy has gone out to you in your terrible struggle

1697. Our mutual friend, Jawaharlal Nehru, whose love of Chin

1698. a is only excelled, if at all, by his love of his own country, has kept us in intimate touch with the developments of the Chinese struggle

1699.  112 Famous Letters o[ Mahatma Gandhi

1700. India must not submit to any aggressor o:r: invadet and you must resist him

1701. I would not be guilty of purchasing the freedom of my country at the cost of your country's freedom

1702. The problem does not arise before me as I am clear that India cannot gain her freedom in this way, and a Japanese domination of either India or China would be equally injurious to the other country and to world peace

1703. That domination must, therefore, be prevented, and I should like India to play her natural and rightful part in this

1704. India has been a helpless witness of the withdrawals from Malaya, Singapore and Burma

1705. We .must learn the lesson from these tragic events and prevent by all means at our disposal a repetition -Gf what befell these unfortu11ate countries

1706. But ~ we are free, we can do nothing to prevent it, , an4 the same p:toces$1ni~tht well occur aR"ain, cripJ>linJ2 To Marshal Chiang Kai Shecl<.

1707. 113 L1dia anJ. China dLsastrously

1708. I do not want a =~petition of this tragic tale of woe

1709. Our proffered help has repeatedly been rejected by the British Government and the recent failure of the Cripps Mission has left a deep wound which is .still running

1710. I have told you of my faith in non-violence and of my belief in the effectiveness o:f this method if the whole nation could turn to it

1711. But I realise that India today as a whole has not that bith and belief, and the Government in free India would be formed from the val'ious elements composing the nation

1712. The Indian Army consists largely of people who have JOined up because of economic , pressure

1713. They have no feeling o a cause to fight for and in no sense are they a national army

1714. Those of us who would fight for a cause, for India and China, with armed forces or with non .violence cannot under the foreign heel function as they want to

1715. And yet our people know for certain that 114 Famous Letters of MahtJtma Gandhi

1716. Many, like me, feel that is not proper or manly to remain in this helple1:.s state and allow events to overwhelm us when a wuy to effective action can be opened to us

1717. 1They eel, therefore, that every possible effort should be made to ensure independence a

1718. nd that freedom or action which is sc1 urgently needed

1719. there lS grave danger of public fee-ling in India gomg into wrong and harmful channels

1720. We have te learn self- reliance and develop the strength to work out our own salvation

1721. This is only posJiblc if we make a determined effort to free ourselve!' from bondage

1722. That freedom ha$ become a present necessity to enable us to take our due place nmong the free f)f"tfl'lf"'~ of thP wnrM. To Marshal Chiang Kai Sheck

1723. I need hardly give you my assurance that, t.b the author of the new move in India I shall take no hasty action

1724. I am trying to enlist world opiruon in favour of a proposition which to me appears self~ proved and which must lead to the strengthening of India's and China's defence

1725. Needless to say, any movement against the British Government with which I may be con nected will be essentially non-violent

1726. I am strain- ing every nerve to avoid a conflict with British authority

1727. But if in the vindication of the freedom, which has become an immediate desideratum, this becomes inevitable, I shall not hesitate to run any t.:isk, however flreat

1728.  116 Famous Letters of Mahatma Gandhi Very soon yoy

1729. fiye rs of war agaip.t .'f!i.P2-!l~s~ .agg~~~sion~i!.Ud- invasion and an the sorrow and misery that these have brought to China

1730. ( My heart goes out to the people of China in deep sympathy and in admiration for their heroic struggle and endless sacrifices in the cause of their country's freedom and integrity against tremendous odds

1731. I am convinced that this heroism and sacrifice cannot be in vain ; they must bear fruit

1732. To you, to Madame Chiang and to the great people of China, I send my earnest and sincere wishes of your success

1733. J look forward to the day when a free India and free China will co-operate together in friendship and brotherhood for their own good and for the good of Asia and the world

1734. ------TO THE PEOPLE OF AMERICA. (In the following letter addressed to Americans ar1d written on Asust 3, IQ:4.2, sometime be/ore the fateful August Disturbances started, Gandhiji asked the in habitants of America not

1735. to be misled by the vilifying pro paganda of B,itain against Indian national leaders including himself

1736. He in due humility called upon them ro sift the tTutlt from the chaff an,!L to give_moral subbmt to India's demand for freeqom.) _.._ __ ~NTERESTED PROPAGANDA HAS BEGUILED YOU. I claim to be a votary of truth from my child~ hood

1737. My prayerful search gave me the revealing maxim "Truth is God" instead of the usual one "God is Truth", That rnaxim enables me to see God face to face as it were

1738. By that supreme act of justice Britain would have ~ken away aU cause for the seething dis- content of India

1739. She will turn the growing ill .

1740. I submit that it is worth all the battleships and airships that your wonder working en4in~s and financial resources can produce

1741. 119 I know that interested propaganda has filled your ears and eyes with distorted visions of the Congress position

1742. I have been painted as a hypo~ crite and enemy of Britain under disguise

1743. My demonstrable ::;pirit of accommodation has been described as my inconsistency, proving me to be an utterly unreliable man

1744. 1 am not going to burden this letter with prout in support ot my assertions

1745. i know the credit I have enjoyed in America will not stand me in good stead, nothing I may argue in self- defence will cart y conviction

1746. You will do a grevious wrong to the Allied cause if you do not sift the trh ftom_the chaff whilst there is yet time

1747. Is there anything wrong in the Congress demanding unconditional recognition of India's independence

1748. For then and then only can there be irresist1ble opposition to Japanese aggression

1749. The Congress has anticipated and provided or every possible difficulty in the way of recognition

1750. I want you to look upon the immediate recognition of India's independence as a war measure of first class

1751. The Government in their propaganda campaigns within as weU as outside the country laid the entire responsibility for August Disturbances upon Congress Leaders,

1752. whereas the national circle were unanimous in declaring that the crisis t.vas precipitated b) the repressive policy of the Got~ernment

1753. The entire country from one end to the other was aflame with unprecedented mob fury, and ir: appeared as if the Indian action had once for all decided to  do or die

1754. The Government on their part were bent upon crushing the movement b) hook or by crook

1755. It was in such a SOTT"J state of affairs that Gandhiji addressed the following letter to Lord Lmlithgow, wherein he criticb;ed the

1756. Government resolution on Congress struggle point b:~ point

1757. While the disturbances were deplored as an unfortunate lapse from tlfe tradition of nont~iolence set /Of the countr:y b;y the Congress there was no disposition to regard them as having been planned by the Congress Leaders.} WHO IS GUILTY

1758. Dear Lord Linlithgow, The Government of India were wrong in precipitating the crisis

1759. Th~ Government resolution justifying this step is full of distortions and misrepre- 5entatiOns

1760. That you have the approval of your Indian ' colleagues' can have no significance except this that in India you can always command such service::.

1761. That co-operation is an additional justifica- tion for the demand of withdrawal irrespective of what people and parties may say

1762. The Government of India should have waited at 1 east till the t1me I inaugurated mass aa.tion

1763. As you know, the Congress has readily :filled in every omission that has been discover- ed in the conception of its demand

1764. The precipitate action of the Government leads one to think that they were afraid that the extreme caution and gradualness with which the Con~tress was moving towatds direct.act\on .

1765. 122 Famous Letters of Mahatma Gandhi

1766. might make world opinion veer round to the Congress, as it had already begun doing, and expose the hollowness of the grounds for the Government's rejection of the Congress demand

1767. They should surely have waited for an authentic report of my speeches on Friday and on Saturday night after the passing of the resolution by the All-India Congress Committee

1768. You would have taken advantage of the interval foreshadowed in them, and explored every possibility of satisfying the Congress demand

1769. The resolution says: The Government of India have waited patiently in the hope that wiser counsels might prevail

1770. They have been dis- appointed in that hope

1771. I suppose ' wiser counsele' here means abandonment of its demand by the Congress

1772. Why should the abandonment of the demand, legitimate at all times, be hoped for by a Government pledged to guarantee independence to ..:tndia

1773. I venture to suggest that it is a long draft upon the credulity of mankind to say that the acceptance of the demand would plunge India into c

1774. Any way the sum.~ mary rejection of the demand has plunged the natiOn and the Go'\7etnment into confusion

1775. 123 .Congress was making every effort to identify India with the Allied -cause

1776. A definition of what could be included in non-violent action has been interpreted in a sinister and subtle manner as if the Congress was preparing for violent action

1777. Everything was openly discussed among Congress circles, for nothing was to be done secretly

1778. And why is it tampering with your loyalty if I ask you to give up a job which is harming the British people'

1779. 'taid themselves open to the charge of unfair dealing

1780. Was it wise at this time of the day to seek to suppress a popular Government avowedly non-violent

1781. The Congress is not India's mouthpiece

1782. This ianguage lies ill in the mouth of a Government which has, as can be proved from published records, consistently thwarted every national effort for attaining freedom, and sought to suppress the Congress by hook or crook

1783. The Government of India have not condescend- ed to consider th~ Congress offer that if simultaneously ,:wi-~ tb~ declatation of the Independence o India ~1 a:n.J.4l not trust the Congress to form a stable To Lord Linlir:hgow

1784. 125 provisional Government they should ask the Muslim League to do so, and that any National Government formed by the League would be loyally accepted by the Congress

1785. It is that, as soon as hostilities cease, India shall devise

1786. for herself, with full freedom of decision and on a basis embracing all and not only a single party,

1787. Only after the end of British power and a fundamental change in the political status of India from bondage to freedom will the lOtmation of a truly representative government 26' Famous Letters of Mahatma Gandhi

1788. '\\'pether provisional or permanent, be possible

1789. The living burial of the author of the demand has not resolved the deadlock, it has aggravated

1790. The Congress seeks to kill imperialism as much for the sake of the 8titish people and humanity as for India

1791. Notwith~ standing assertions to the contrary, I maintain that the Congtess bas no interests o its own, apart from that of the whole of India ~nd the world

1792. 127 The following passage from the peroration in the resolution is interesting

1793. It is sad to find the Government of India claiming to hold the ' balance ' between the parties for which it is itself demonstrably responsible

1794. To put it in the most concrete terms, it is the protection of the freedom of China and Russia

1795. His personal contacts make him feel than I can and, may I say,

1796. 128 Famous Letters of Mahatma Gandhi

1797. He yielded when he saw clearly that without the freedom o India that of the other two was in great jeopardy

1798. Surely, you are wrong in having impri soned such a powerful friend and ally

1799. The determina- tion led to the rejection of the Congress demand and precipitated repression

1800. The present mutual slaughter on a scale never before known to history is suffocat- ing enough

1801. But the slaughter of truth accompany- ing the butchery and enforced by the falsity of which the resolution is reeking adds strength to the Congress position

1802. But however much I dislike your action, I remain the same friend you have known me

1803. I would still plead for recon$ideration of the Government of India's whole policy

1804. Do not dis- regard the pleading of one who claims to be a sincere friend of the British people

1805. G A..Nf)HT. To the Secretary, Home Department

1806. In spite of all that has been said to the contraty, I claim that the Congress policy still remains unequi vocally non-violent

1807. The wholesale arrest of the Congress leaders seems to have made the people wild with rage to the point of losing self .

1808. I feel that the Government not the Congress are respon- sible for the destruction that has taken place

1809. The 1nly right course for the Government seems to-me to be to release the Congress leaders, withdraw all  -tepressive measures and- explore ways and means of 130 Famous Letters of Mahatma Gandhi

1810. Surely, the Government have ample r:esources to deal with any overt act of violence

1811. Since I am permitted to receive newspapers, I feel that I owe it to the Government to give my reaction to the said happenings in the country

1812. If the Government think that as a prisoner I have no right to address such communications, they have but to say so, and I will not repeat the mistake

1813. etc., M. K. GANDHI. --Lutter on New Year's Eve

1814. New Year's Eve t94Z MAY THE NEW YEAR BRING PEACE TO US. Personal

1815. Dear Lord Linhthgow, This is a very personal letter

1816. Cont1ary to the biblical injunction, I have allowed many suns to set on a quarrel

1817. I have harboured against you, but I must not allow the old year to expire without dis- burdening myself of what is rankling in my breast against you

1818. what has happened since August 9 last makes me wonder whether you still regard me as a friend

1819. Your arrest of me, the communique you issued thereafter, your reply to Rajaji and the reasons given therefor, Mr

1820. Amery's attack on me and much else I can catalogue go to show that at some stage or ot~er you must have suspected my bona .fides

1821. 132 Famous Letters of Mahatma Gandhi

1822. Mention of other Congressmen in the same connec- tiotl is by the way

1823. I seem to bF the Ions et orig01 of !Ill the evil imputed to the Congress

1824. If I have' not ceased to be your friend, why did you not, before taking drastic actiont send for me, tell me of your suspicions and make yourself sure of your facts

1825. I am quite capable of seeing myself as others see 1ne~' but in this case I have failed hopelessly

1826. I find that all the statements made about me in Govern- ment quarters in this connection contain palpable departures from truth

1827. I have so much fallen from grace that I could not establish contact with a dying friend ; I mean Prof

1828. Bhansi who IS fasting in regard to the Chimur affair and I am expected to condemn the socalled violence of some people reputed to be Congressmen, although I have no data for such con- demnation save the heavily censored reports of newspapers

1829. I could write much more, but I must nQt lengthen my tale of woe

1830. I am sure that what I have said is enough to enable you to .6.11 in details

1831. know I returned to India rom South Africa at the end of 1914 with a mission which came to me in 19~6, namely, to spread truth and non~violence among tllankind in the place of violence and fals4?' To Lord Linlithgow

1832. Prison is one of the many ways o{ spreading the message, but it has its limits

1833. You have placed me in a palace where every reasonable creatu1 e comfort is ensured

1834. I have freely partaken of the latter purely as a matter of duty, never as a pleasure, in the hope that some day those that have the power will realise that they have wronged in- nocent men

1835. The penod is drawing to a close, so is my patience

1836. ' Cructfy the flesh by fasting '

1837. same law for- bids its use except as a last resort

1838. I did not want to use it if I can avoid 1t

1839. This is the way to avoid it, conv lnce me of my error or errors, and I shall make ~mple amends

1840. one who knows your mind and can carry con- viction

1841. May the New Y~ar bring peace to us all

1842. I am, Your sincere friend, M. K. GANDHI. Januarv 19, 1943

1843. TO LORD LINLITHGOW. PerSO'f'iO.l Dear Lord Linlithgow, I received your kind letter ot the 13th mstant yestetday at 2-30 p.m

1844. I have almost dispaired of ever hc::~.ring from you

1845. My letter of 31st December was a g1owl agamst you

1846. It means that you maintain that you were right in arresting me and you were sorry for the omissions of which, in your opinion, I was guilty

1847. The inference you draw from my letter is, I am afraid, not correct

1848. I have re-read my letter in the light of your h1terpretationt but have failed to find your meaning in it

1849. I wanted to fast and should still want to if nothing comes out of our correspond- ence and I have to be a helpless witness to what is going on in the country, including the privations of the-millions owing to the universal scarcity stalking theland

1850. 135 I I do not accept your interpretation of my letter, you want 1ne to make a positive suggestion

1851. This I might be able to do, only if you put me among the members of the Working Committee of the Congress

1852. If I could be convinced ot my enor or worse, of which you are evidently, I should need to consult nobody, so far as my own action is concerned, to make a full and open confession and make ample amends

1853. I wonder if you saw my letter to the Secretary to the Government of India, of September 23, 1942

1854. I adhere to what I have said in it and m my letter to you August 14, 1942

1855. Of course I deplore the happenings which have taken place since August 9 last

1856. Moreover, I could not express any opinion on events which I cannot xnfluence or control and of which I have but a one~ sided account

1857. Such reports have before now ~ often proved fallible

1858. It was for that reason that 136 Famous Letters of Mahatma Gandlti

1859. in my letter of December 31, I pleaded with you to convince me of the correctness of the information on which your conviction ~as based

1860. This however, I can say from the house~top that I am as confirmed a believer in non-violence as I have ever been

1861. This time, the retracing, as I have submitted hes with the Government

1862. You \Vlll fotgive me for expressing an opinion chall

1863. I am certain that nothing but good would have resulted if you had stayed your hand and granted me the interview which I had announced on the night of August 8, I was to seek

1864. Here, may 1 remind you that the Government of India have before now owned their mistakes as, fot itastance, in the Punjab when the late Gen~al To Lord Linlithgow

1865. 137 Dyer was condemned, in the United Provinces when a corner of a mosque in Cawnpore was restored and in Bengal when the Partition was annulled

1866. To sum up- (1) If you want me to act singly, convince me that I was wrong and I will malte ample amends

1867. (2) I you want me to make any proposal on behalf of the Congress, you should put me atnong the Congress Working Committee members

1868. If I am obscure or have not answered your letter fully, please point out the omissions and I shall make an attempt to give you satisfaction

1869. I find that m.y letters to you are sent through the Government of Bombay

1870. As time ls of the essence in this matter, perhaps you will issue jnstructions that my letters to you may be sent direct by the Superintendent of this camp

1871. I am, Y out since;re friemd, M. T<"

1872. DECISION TO FAST. (Whereas Gandhiji m his letters defended the Congress stand Lord Linlithgow~ the Vicero:y continued to hold Congress responsible for the August 1942 rebellion

1873. A vigorous anti-Congress, anti-IndJan campaign was launched in Foreign countries and a ruthless repression let loose on Indian 'rebels'

1874. You have not even said what part a the August resolution is bad or offensive in your opm!on

1875. That resolution is in no way a retraction by the Congress of its policy of non-violence

1876.  it tenders co-operation in war effort under citcumst-l 40 Famous Letters of Mahatma Gandhi

1877. ances which alone can make effective and nation- wide co-operation possible

1878. jection may be raised to that clause of the resolution which contemplated civil disobe- dience

1879. But that by itself cannot constitute an objection since the principle of civil disobedience is impliedly conceded in what is known as the' Gandhi- Irwin Pact'

1880. Surely, I can say with safety that it is for the Government to justify their action by solid evidence, not by mere ' ipse dixit '

1881. I see the fact of the murders as clearly as I hope, as you do

1882. -My answer is that the Government goaded the _ ~e to the point of madness

1883. that violen,ce is not any the less sof To Lord Linlithgow

1884. 141 because it is organised on a scale so gigantic that it displaces the Mosaic Law of tooth for tooth by that of ten thousand for one-no.t to mention the corol- lary of the Mosaic Law, i.e., of non-resistance as enunciated by Jesus Christ

1885. I cannot interpret in any other manner the repressive measure& of the all-powerful Government of India

1886. Add to this tale of woe the privations of the poor millions due to India-wide scarcity which 1 cannot help thinking might have been largely mitigated, if not altogether prevented, had there been a bona lid.

1887. If then I cannot get soothing hahn for my pain I must resort to the law prescribed for Satyagrahis,

1888. namely, a fast according to capacity

1889. I must commence after the early morning breakfast of February ~.a fast for 21 days ending 011 March 2

1890. Usually during my fasts, I take water with the addition of salts

1891. my //W1s is not to fast unto eath, but to survive the :'botdeal, if God so will

1892. This fast can be ended sooner  y the Government giving the needed relief

1893. TO LORD LlNLlTHGOW. (LAST LETTER) {The reply from the Vtceroy to Gand1t.ijz's int&ma rwn on fast was not only responsive but also threatening

1894. He went to the Length of describmg Gandhijz's decision to Fast as 'political blackmazling '

1895. Oandhiji addressed the following last letter to the then Viceroy.) THE RESPONSIBILITY IS NO DOUBT MINE BUT ..

1896. D~?-at Lord Linlithgow, , I have to thank you for your long reply dated the 5th instant to my letter of January 29 last

1897. I would take your last point first, namely, the contemplated bst which begms on 9th instant

1898. Your letter from a Satyagrah1's standpoint is an invitation to fast

1899. No doubt the responsibility for the step and its consequences, will be solely mine

1900. xpression to slip from your pen, for which I was unprepared

1901. In the conclud- ing sentence of the second paragraph you describe the step as an attempt to find any easy way out

1902. That you as a friend, can impute such a base and cowardly motive to me passes comprehension

1903. You have also described it as "a form of political black- mall"

1904. And you quote my prev10us wnting on the subject against me

1905. l hold that there is nothing incons1stent in them with the contemplated step

1906. I do claim that I had approached you with an open mind when I R.slred vou to convince me of my ~ 44 Famous Letters of Mahatma Gandhi

1907. " Profound distrust " of the published reports is in no way inconsistent with my having m open mind

1908. I have seen no ~vidence in support of such a serious charge

1909. The speech of the Home Member, of which you have favoured me w1th a copy, may be taken as the opening speech of the prosecution counsel and nothing more

1910. 0 course he has described the violent outburst in graphic language

1911. Surely, there is nothing wrong in my asking you to show me the evidence on which you hold them guilty

1912. Proof , should- correspond to the canons of English Jurispru- ,ft~t~..,,.,  To Lord Linlitlt.gow

1913. 145 H the wife of a member of the Working Committee' is actively engaged in "planning the bomb outrages and others acts of termrism,

1914. The lady you refer to could only have Jone tho:

1915. thmgs attributed to her after the wholesale .1rrestl\ oJ August 9 last, which I have dared to des- cnbe us leomne vwlence

1916. Hav-e you ever thought of the possibility of their being found baseless when they are put before an impartial tribunal

1917. Or that some of the condemned persons might have d1ed in the meanwlule, ot that some of the evidence that ~he living can produce might become tmavailable

1918. I reiterate the statement that the principle of civ1l di~obedience Is ilnpliatly conceded in the Settlement of March 5, 1931 arnved at between the then Viceroy on behalf of the Government of India and myself on behalf of the Congress

1919. I hope you know that the principal Congressmen were discharged before that settlement was even thought o

1920. Civ1l disobed1ence was discontiaued on certain conditions being fulfilled by the Governmen-t 146 Famous

1921. That by itself, was, in my opinion, an acknowledge- ment of its legitimacy, of course under given chcum- stances

1922. It therefore seems somewhat strange to find you maintain that civil disobedience cannot be recognised as being in a11y ctrcumstances legittmate by your Governme11t

1923. You ignore the practic~ of the British Government which has recogmsed this legitimacy under the name of ' passive resistance.

1924. Lastly you read mto my letters a meaning whtch is wholly inconsistent with my declaration, in one of them of adherence to unadulterated non-violence

1925. 1 must be a strange friend of yours whom you believe to be capable of asking for recognition of such things as lawful

1926. I have  only picked 9Ut those things which in my opinion T1l Lord Linlithgow

1927. 147 demanded an immediate answer

1928. I begin it Otl the 9th instant with the clear .

1929. Despite your description of it as a " form of political blackmail ", it is on my part meant to be an appeal to the Highest Tribunal for justice which I have failed to secure from you

1930. If I do not survive the ordeal, I shall go to the Judgment Seat with the fullest faith in my ignorance

1931. Posterity will judge between you as representat1ve o an all-power .

1932. \My last letter was written against time, and therefore a material paragraph went in as postscript

1933. I now send herewith a fair copy typed by Pearey Lal who has taken Mahadev Desai's place

1934. You will find the postscript paragraph restored to the place wher~ it should have been

1935. I ba,e mentioned tn letters to His Excellency the conc..htwns wluch can induce prevention or suspension of the step

1936. If the temporary release 1s offered for roy convenience I do not need it

1937. I shall be quite con- tent to take my fast as a detenu or prtsoner

1938. I it is for the convenience of the Government, I am sorry, 1 am unable to su1t them, much as I should like to do so

1939. I can say this much that I, as a prisoner, shall avoid, as far as is humanly possible, every cause of Inconvenience to the Government save what is inherent in the fast It

